# 8.4 An Introduction to Direct and Inverse Variation

**Direct Variation**

In essence, direct variation can be thought of as having a direction correlation
of something (i.e. more hours worked equals more pay).

If $y$ varies directly as $x$, then $y$ goes up when $x$ goes up (and visa
versa).

$$ y = k \times x $$

Where $k$ is the constant of variation

$$ k = CONSTANT\_OF\_VARIATION $$

---

**Ex:**

Suppose $y$ varies directly as $x$. If $y$ is $24$ when $x$ is $8$, find $k$,
and set up the direct variation equation.

When we refer to _direct_ in this context, it means "k times something". In
other words, _multiplication is implied by the term direct_.

$$ 24 = k \times 8 $$

$$ 24 = 8k $$

$$ \frac{24}{8} = \frac{8k}{8} $$

$$ 3 = k $$

$$ k = 3 $$

Now that we have solved for $k$, we rewrite our equation:

<ins>Answer:</ins>

$$ y = 3x $$

---

**Ex:**

Suppose $y$ varies directly as $x$. If $y$ is $20$ when $x$ is $15$, find $k$,
and set up the direct variation equation.

$$ y = k \times x  $$

$$ 20 = k \times 15 $$

$$ 20 = 15k $$

$$ \frac{20}{15} = \frac{15k}{15} $$

$$ \frac{20}{15} = k $$

$$ k = \frac{20}{15} $$

$$ k = \frac{4}{3} $$

<ins>Answer:</ins>

$$ y = \frac{4}{3}x $$

---

**Ex:**

Suppose that the _distance_ a spring stretches is _directly_ proportional to the
_weight_ attached to it.

$$ DISTANCE = D $$

$$ WEIGHT = W $$

$$ D = k \times W $$

Let's say a $56$ pound weight stretches the spring $8$ inches.

$$ 8 = k \times 56 $$

$$ 8 = 56k $$

$$ \frac{8}{56} = \frac{56k}{56} $$

$$ \frac{8}{56} = k $$

$$ \frac{1}{7} = k $$

<ins>Answer:</ins>

$$ D = \frac{1}{7}W $$

How far will an $85$ pound weight stretch this spring?

$$ D = \frac{1}{7}(85) $$

$$ D = \frac{85}{7} $$

$$ D = 12.15 \text{ inches} $$

---

**Inverse Variation**

Obviously this is the _opposite_ of _Direct Variation_. This means there is an
_inverse_ correlation between two factors, such as the more you exercise, the
less fat you have on your body.

If $y$ varies _inversely_ as $x$, then $y$ _goes down_ as $x$ _goes up_.

You can think of this simply in mathematical terms by comparing the output of a
standard division operation:

$$ \frac{35}{7} = 5 $$

$$ \frac{35}{10} = 3.5 $$

$$ \frac{35}{35} = 1 $$

$$ \frac{35}{70} = \frac{1}{2} $$

As the denominator grows, the value of the division becomes smaller, the two
values (the increasing of the denominator and the decreasing of the output),
_vary inversely_.

$$ y = \frac{k}{x} $$

Where $k$ is the constant of variation

$$ k = CONSTANT\_OF\_VARIATION $$

---

**Ex:**

Suppose $y$ varies _inversely_ as $x$. $y$ is $6$ when $x$ is $3$. Find $k$ and
write the _Inverse Variation Equation_.

$$ y = \frac{k}{x} $$

$$ 6 = \frac{k}{3} $$

$$ 6\times3 = \frac{k}{3}\times3 $$

$$ 18 = k $$

<ins>Answer:</ins>

$$ y = \frac{18}{x} $$

---

**Ex:**

The _speed_ needed to travel a certain distance is _inversely proportional_ to
the _time_ it takes to travel that distance.

The distance that can be driven in $5$ hours at a rate of $70$ miles per hour.
How fast do you have to go to make the same trip in $4$ hours.

$$ SPEED = S $$

$$ TIME = T $$

$$ S = \frac{k}{T} $$

$$ 70 = \frac{k}{5} $$

$$ 5\times70 = \frac{k}{5}\times5 $$

$$ 350 = k $$

$$ S = \frac{350}{T} $$

<ins>Answer:</ins>

$$ S = \frac{350}{4} $$

$$ S = 87.5\text{ mph} $$
