# 12.6: Studying Common and Natural Logarithms.

**Common Logs, Natural Logs, Change Of Base**

---

_Common Log:_ A Logarithm With a _Base_ of $10$.

$$ log_{10}x = logx $$

> In the Qalculate App, you can input this as "log10(n)" where n is the number
> you wish to find the Common Log of. On most calculators you will see a "LOG"
> button, which you press prior to inputting the nubmer you want to find the
> Common Log of.

**Ex:**

Find this using your calculator:

$$ log21 $$

$$ log21 \approx 1.32 $$

**Ex:**

$$ log15 $$

$$ log15 \approx 1.18 $$

---

**Ex:**

Let's do this next one without a calculator:

$$ log100 $$

This should read as "$10$ to what power gives me $100$?", Which of course, the
power we're looking for is $2$:

$$ log100 = 2 $$

---

**Ex:**

$$ log\frac{1}{100} = -2 $$

---

**Ex:**

$$ log10000 = 4 $$

---

**Ex:**

$$ log\sqrt[3]{10} = \frac{1}{3} $$

---

**Ex:**

$$ logx = 2.9 $$

$$ 10^{2.9} = x $$

$$ 794.33 \approx x $$

---

**Ex:**

$$ logx = 3.4 $$

$$ 10^{3.4} = x $$

$$ 2511.89 \approx x $$

---

Let's take a real world example with the _Richter Scale_, which is based off the
_Common Logarithm_:

$$ R = log(\frac{a}{T}) + B $$

$$ a = \text{AMPLITUDE} $$

$$ T = \text{TIME BETWEEN THE WAVES} $$

$$ B = \text{SET BASE NUMBER} $$

**Ex:**

Find the _Richter Scale_ where the Amplitude is of 350 micrometers. Where there
are 3.2 seconds between the waves, with B = 2.5.

$$ R = log(\frac{350}{3.2}) + 2.5 $$

Entering this into our calculator:

$$ R \approx 4.5 $$

This gives us an understanding of why a $5.5$ earthquake is so much worse than a
$4.5$ earthquake. Because the formula uses a _Common Logarithm_, this means that
a single point on the Richter Scale represents scales of $10$ due to the _Base_
of $10$.

---

_Natural Log:_ A _Logarithm_ with a _Base_ of $e$.

To find out more about $e$, look up
[Natural Logarithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_logarithm). This is
not to be confused with
[Euler's Constant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler%27s_constant).

> On Qalculate, you can type in "e", and to find the Natural Log you can type in
> ln(n) where n is a nonzero value. On most calculators, you will find it under
> a button with "LN" printed on it.

This can be expressed as:

$$ log_{e}x $$

But it is more commonly denoted like so:

$$ \ln(x) $$

---

**Ex:**

$$ \ln(21) $$

$$ \ln(21) \approx 3.04 $$

---

**Ex:**

$$ \ln(15) $$

$$ \ln(15) \approx 2.71 $$

---

Recall that when we raise our base to the power of $x$ in a _Logarithm_, we get
back $x$:

$$ log_{b}b^x = x $$

If this is the case, then what happens when we express this using a _Natural
Log_?:

$$ \ln(e^x) $$

This means the same shorthand:

$$ \ln(e^x) = x $$

$$ \ln(e^5) = 5 $$

**Ex:**

$$ 5\ln(e) = 5 $$

**Ex:**

$$ ln\sqrt{e} = ln(e^{\frac{1}{2}}) $$

**Ex:**

$$ ln(e^7) $$

$$ ln(e^7) = 7 $$

**Ex:**

$$ ln(\sqrt[4]{e}) $$

$$ ln(\sqrt[4]{e}) = ln(e^{\frac{1}{4}})$$

---

**Solving:**

**Ex:**

$$ ln(7x) = 10 $$

$$ e^{10} = 7x $$

$$ \frac{e^{10}}{7} = x $$

---

**Practice:**

$$ ln(5x) = 8 $$

$$ e^8 = 5x $$

$$ \frac{e^8}{5} = x $$

---

**Practice:**

$$ ln(5x + 1) = 8 $$

$$ e^8 = 5x + 1 $$

$$ e^8 - 1 = 5x $$

$$ \frac{e^8 - 1}{5} = x $$

---

**Continuously Compounded Interest**

Continuously Compounded Interest is Interest that is Compounded _every second_.
It is calculated using the following formula. You may recall a similar formula
from when we covered Chapter 12.3.

$$ A = Pe^{r \times T} $$

$$ A = \text{AMOUNT} $$

$$ P = \text{PRINCIPLE} $$

$$ r = \text{INTEREST RATE} $$

$$ T = \text{TIME IN YEARS} $$

Note how there is no $n$ in this example, as there is no number of compounds per
year (as the number of compounds is continuous).

**Ex:**

You Borrow $\$1200$ at $8\%$ for $3$ years compounded _continuously_.

Note that if the word _continuously_ was not used in the above, we would have to
use the formula from section 12.3.

$$ A = 1200e^{.08 \times 3} $$

Using our qalculator we get:

$$ A \approx \$1525.50 $$

Again, notice that the compound doesn't change the $\text{AMOUNT}$ much.

---

**Change Of Base**

The Change Of Base simply means we can change the base of one logarithm into
another logarithm with a different base:

$$ log_{b}a = \frac{log(a)}{log(b)} = \frac{ln(a)}{ln(b)} $$

$$ log_{7}5 = \frac{log(5)}{log(7)} = \frac{ln(5)}{ln(7)} $$

$$ log_{7}5 = \frac{ln(5)}{ln(7)} = \frac{1.6094}{1.9459} \approx 0.8271 $$
