# 7.1 Defining and Simplifying Rational Expressions (Rational Functions)

A <em>Fraction</em> is where Both the <em>Numerator</em> and
<em>Denominator</em> are <em>Polynomials</em>.

<p style="text-align:center;">Polynomails:</p>

$$ \frac{P}{Q} $$

---

Ex:

$$ \frac{5x -3}{2} $$

Ex:

$$ \frac{x^2 - 1}{x + 1} $$

Ex:

$$ \frac{13}{x^2 - 5x + 6} $$

---

**Functional notation:**

$$ f(x) $$

Is simply an expression of some function named $f$ whose variable is $x$.
Commonly said as "f of x".

---

**Rational Functions:**

An example of a rational function:

$$ f(x) = \frac{x - 3}{x^3}$$

Just like with basic division/fractions, you can never divide by 0, thusly this
would result in undefined:

$$ \frac{4}{0} = undefined $$

Thusly a rule for rational functions is:

> For any rational function, the denominator cannot be zero. But if the
> denominator is zero at some point, then the function is undefined at that
> point (it is ok for a numerator to equal zero).

Because a rational function inherently uses a series of polynomials, should
those polynomials equate to the denominator becoming undefined under certain
parameters (i.e. $x$ ends up equating to summing, adding, dividing, or
multiplying to a denominator that is $0$), then this is said that that rational
function is <b><em>undefined at that point</em></b>.

---

**The Domain:**

Let's take this rational function:

$$ f(x) = \frac{x^2 + 1}{x - 6} $$

Let's find the <b><em>Domain</em></b>:

The Domain is defined as any input we can plug in for $x$ and get a defined
output out.

$\textbf{Domain:}$ The domain is the set of all real numbers $x$ such that
$x \neq 6$. In mathematical notation, we write it as:

$$ D: x \in \mathbb{R}, x \neq 6 $$

Which defines the input we could provide for $x$ under which our function $f$
would produce a defined output.

Thusly, to find the domain, we can set the denominator to not equal 0 and then
solve.

---

Ex.

$$ g(x) = \frac{x^2 - 9}{4} $$

Since this denominator is never going to equal $0$, we can simply write our
domain as $x$ where $x$ is a real number.

$$ D: x\in \mathbb{R} $$

---

Ex.

$$ h(x) = \frac{5^2 + 9}{x + 2} $$

$$ D: x\in \mathbb{R}, x\neq -2 $$

---

Ex.

$$ f(x) = \frac{5x + 4}{x^2 - 3x - 10} $$

We need to solve:

$$ x^2 - 3x - 10 \neq 0 $$

This we can solve with the diamond problem. Recall that:

$$ ax^2 + bx + c $$

Gives us the general idea of the diamond. In this case we need to compare:

$$ a * c $$

with:

$$ b $$

In our case:

$$ a * c = -10 $$

and:

$$ b = -3 $$

We then need to find two numbers that add up to $b$ and multiply to $a * c$. In
this case those two numbers are $-5$ and $2$. Then we can write our equation as:

$$ x(x - 5) + 2(x-5) \neq 0 $$

But because $a = 1$, we can simply skip that as:

$$ (x - 5)(x + 2) \neq 0 $$

We can then determine that $x$ cannot be $5$ and also cannot be $-2$. Thusly we
write our Domain as:

$$ D: x\in \mathbb{R}, x\neq 5, x\neq -2 $$

---

**Simplify:**

Note, this fraction cannot be simplified:

$$ \frac{5}{17} $$

Whereas this fraction can be simplified:

$$ \frac{6}{18} $$

Because they have a common factor(CF). The greatest common factor (GCF) in this
case is $6$.

> Simplify when Numerator and Denominator have Common Factors.

Ex.

$$ \frac{15}{35} = \frac{5 * 3}{5 * 7} = \frac{5}{5} * \frac{3}{7} = \frac{3}{7} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{(x + 2)^2}{x^2 - 4} $$

Let's find the domain real quick:

$$ D: x\in \mathbb{R}, x\neq 2, x\neq -2 $$

Now let's simplify this rational expression, and break down the steps:

Let's do that to our fraction:

$$ \frac{(x + 2)(x + 2)}{(x + 2)(x - 2)} $$

We get this Denominator from knowing how we factor using the
<b><em>Difference of Squares</em></b>. And because we are simply multiplying, we
can eliminate <em>factors</em>, in this case, we can eliminate one set of
$x + 2$ in both our numerator and denominator, resulting in:

$$ \frac{x + 2}{x - 2} $$

<ins>Steps:</ins>

1. Factor both the numerator and denominator <em>completely</em>.
2. Simplify common <em>Factors</em>, <b>NOT</b> <em>Common Terms</em>!

---

Ex:

$$ \frac{3y^3}{6^4 - 3y^3} $$

$$ \frac{3y^3}{3y^3(2y - 1)} $$

$$ \frac{1}{2y - 1} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{5x^2 - 6x + 1}{3x^2 + 4x - 7} $$

Double diamond problem:

For the numerator:

$$ a * c = 5 $$

And

$$ b = -6 $$

Two numbers that both multiply to $5$ and add to $-6$ are $-1$ and $-5$, leaving
us with this for the numerator:

$$ 5x^2 - 5x - x + 1 $$

Which further evaluates to:

$$ 5x(x - 1) - 1(x - 1) $$

Which further evaluates to:

$$ (5x - 1)(x - 1) $$

Now the other diamond for the denominator:

$$ a * c = -21 $$

and

$$ b = 4 $$

Two numbers that both multiply to $-21$ and add to $4$ are $-3$ and $7$, leaving
us with this for the denominator:

$$ 3x^2 -3x + 7x - 7 $$

Which further evaluates to:

$$ 3x(x - 1) + 7(x - 1) $$

Which further evaluates to:

$$ (3x + 7)(x - 1) $$

Thusly we have our new expression:

$$ \frac{(5x - 1)(x - 1)}{(3x + 7)(x - 1)} $$

The two factors $(x - 1)$ cancel out, leaving us with our answer:

$$ \frac{5x - 1}{3x + 7} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{5z^4}{10z^5 - 5z^3} $$

This is a bit easier actually. We can just simplify the denominator by finding
the GCF:

$$ 10z^5 - 5z^3 $$

Can be factored by $5z^3$ as such:

$$ (5z^3)(2z^2 - 1) $$

The numerator can also be factored by $5z^3$:

$$ (5z^3)(z) $$

Our new expression reads as such:

$$ \frac{(5z^3)(z)}{(5z^3)(2z^2 - 1)} $$

The $5z^3$ on both the numerator and denominator cancel out:

$$ \frac{z}{2z^2 - 1} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{5 + x}{x + 5} $$

Since addition is communicative, we can just express this as:

$$ \frac{x + 5}{x + 5} $$

Which is equal to $1$. Note that since subtraction is <b><em>NOT</em></b>
communicative, this is not the case for this expression:

$$ \frac{5 - x}{x - 5} $$

Note however, that we actually <em>can</em> factor this expression:

$$ \frac{-x + 5}{x - 5} $$

$$ \frac{-1(x - 5)}{(x - 5)} $$

Since the $x - 5$ "cancels" out on both the numerator and denominator, we can
evaluate this as:

$$ -1 $$

**NOTE:** Factor to make the term with the largest exponent <em>positive</em>.

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{20 - 5x^2}{x^2 + x - 6} $$

Let's factor the numerator considering we want the largest exponent to be
positive.

$$ \frac{-5(-4 + x^2)}{x^2 + x - 6} $$

Which is better read this way:

$$ \frac{-5(x^2 - 4)}{x^2 + x - 6} $$

Let's now work on the denominator using the diamond method:

$$ a * c = -6 $$

$$ b = 1 $$

Two numbers that $3$ and $-2$. Because $a = 1$ we can skip a step and simply
write our denominator as:

$$ (x + 3)(x - 2) $$

Rewriting our fraction now, we have:

$$ \frac{-5(x^2 - 4)}{(x + 3)(x + 2)} $$

Notice that we can still further factor the numerator like so:

$$ -5(x - 2)(x + 2) $$

Thusly our new fraction should look like:

$$ \frac{-5(x - 2)(x + 2)}{(x + 3)(x + 2)} $$

And yes, we can get rid of the factor $x + 2$ on each numerator and denominator,
leaving us with the final simnplified expression:

$$ \frac{-5(x - 2)}{x + 3} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{9x^5 - 3x^4}{3x^3} $$

$$ \frac{(3x^3)(3x^2 - x)}{(3x^3)(1)} $$

Answer:

$$ 3x^2 - x $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{3 - 3x^2}{x^2 + x - 2} $$

$$ \frac{-3(x^2 - 1)}{(x + 2)(x - 1)} $$

$$ \frac{(-3)(x - 1)(x + 1)}{(x + 2)(x - 1)} $$

Answer:

$$ \frac{-3(x + 1)}{x + 2} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{x^3 + 27}{x + 3} $$

$$ \frac{x^3 + 3^3}{x + 3} $$

Use addition of cubes rule:

$$ a^3 + b^3 = (a + b)(a^2 - ab + b^2) $$

Translating to:

$$ \frac{(x + 3)(x^2 - 3x + 9)}{x + 3} $$

Answer:

$$ x^2 - 3x + 9 $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{3x^2 + 6}{x^3 - 3x^2 + 2x - 6} $$

$$ \frac{3(x^2 + 2)}{(x^2)(x - 3) + 2(x - 3)} $$

$$ \frac{3(x^2 + 2)}{(x^2 + 2)(x - 3)} $$

Answer:

$$ \frac{3}{x - 3} $$
