# 7.3 Finding LCD and Equivalent Rational Expressions

## Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions

$$ \frac{7}{3}+\frac{2}{3} $$

We can add these because they have the <em>common denominator</em>, which unlike
with multiplication, we need in order to add these as they are expressed
currently. Thusly:

$$ \frac{7}{3}+\frac{2}{3} = \frac{7+2}{3}=\frac{9}{3} $$

And then we simplify for our final answer:

$$ 3 $$

Thusly, there are a few rules that we must adhere to when adding/subtacting
fractions:

1. We must have a common denominator.

2. The denominator stays the same.

3. We cannot simplify until the last step.

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{x}{3+x}+\frac{2x}{3+x} $$

With rational expressions, we are looking again, for a common denominator when
adding/subtracting. In this example, we have a common denominator already
expressed, $3+x$.

$$ \frac{x+2x}{3+x} $$

And now we combine like terms:

$$ \frac{3x}{3+x} $$

And we can not further simplify, thusly our answer to this is:

$$ \frac{3x}{3+x} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{2x}{2x-5} - \frac{5}{2x-5} $$

With subtraction, it works the same, we need a common denominator, which we have
here. Thusly we can express this as:

$$ \frac{2x-5}{2x-5} $$

Which, when further simplifies is equal to:

$$ 1 $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{4x^2+15x}{x+3}-\frac{8x+15}{x+3} $$

$$ \frac{4x^2+15x-(8x+15)}{x+3} $$

$$ \frac{4x^2+7x-15}{x+3} $$

$$ 4x^2 + 7x - 15 $$

$$ b = 7 $$

$$ a\times c=-60$$

$12$ and $-5$ satisfy.

$$ 4x^2 + 12x - 5x - 15 $$

$$ 4x(x+3) - 5(x+3) $$

$$ (4x-5)(x+3) $$

$$ \frac{(4x-5)(x+3)}{x+3} $$

$$ 4x-5 $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{2x+3}{x+6}-\frac{x-3}{x+6} $$

$$ \frac{2x+3-(x-3)}{x+6} $$

$$ \frac{2x+3-x+3}{x+6} $$

$$ \frac{x+6}{x+6} $$

Answer:

$$ 1 $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{2x^2+5x}{x+2}-\frac{4x+6}{x+2} $$

$$ \frac{2x^2+5x-(4x+6)}{x+2} $$

$$ \frac{2x^2+5x-4x-6}{x+2} $$

$$ \frac{2x^2+x-6}{x+2} $$

$$ 2x^2+x-6 $$

$$ b=1 $$

$$ a\times c=-12 $$

$-3$ and $4$ satisfy.

$$ 2x^2 -3x + 4x - 6 $$

$$ x(2x-3) + 2(2x-3) $$

$$ (x+2)(2x-3) $$

$$ \frac{(x+2)(2x-3)}{x+2} $$

Answer:

$$ 2x-3 $$

---

**Review of LCD:**

Let's step back and look at simple fractions where a common denominator is not
given to us:

$$ \frac{2}{3}+\frac{7}{8} $$

In this case, we must find the Lowest Common Denominator(LCD) in order to
progress towards adding.

The LCD can be found by finding the product of unique factors in the
denominator.

$$ (\frac{8}{8})(\frac{2}{3})+(\frac{7}{8})(\frac{3}{3}) $$

$$ \frac{16}{24}+\frac{21}{24} $$

Answer:

$$ \frac{37}{24} $$

---

Now the denominators have no common factors, thusly simply multiplying them is
acceptable, but in order to ensure we do not have to simplify further, it is
best to look for the greatest common factor to multiply by instead. Take the
following as an example:

Ex.

$$ \frac{2}{9} + \frac{7}{15} $$

While we could multiply $9$ by $15$ and get $135$, both $9$ and $15$ are
divisble by $3$, thusly we can find the LCD by first multiplying $9$ and $15$,
then dividing that product by the greatest common factor $3$. Hence:

$$ LCD=\frac{9\times15}{3} = \frac{135}{3} = 45 $$

We can then multiply each side by 1 like so:

$$ (\frac{5}{5})(\frac{2}{9})+(\frac{7}{15})(\frac{3}{3}) $$

$$ \frac{10}{45}+\frac{21}{45} $$

Answer:

$$ \frac{31}{45} $$

---

Now let's find the LCD when variables are involved:

$$ \frac{5}{6x^3}\text , \frac{11}{8x^5} $$

The LCD between $6$ and $8$ is $24$.

Now let's find the largest power of our variable $x$.

So our LCD becomes: $24x^5$.

We can double check to see if $6$ and $8$ goes into $24$ and $x^3$ and $x^5$
goes into $x^5$.

---

$$ \frac{4}{3y}\text, \frac{11}{15y^3} $$

The LCD of $3$ and $15$ is $15$.

The LCD of $y$ and $y^3$ is $y^3$.

Thusly:

$$ LCD=15y^3 $$

---

$$ \frac{1}{12x^7}\text, \frac{2}{x^4} $$

The LCD of $12$ and $1$ is $12$.

The LCD of $x^7$ and $x^4$ is $x^7$.

Thusly:

$$ LCD=12x^7 $$

---

$$ \frac{3a}{a+5}\text ,\frac{7a}{a-5} $$

The LCD is equal to:

$$ LCD=(a+5)(a-5) $$

**NOTE:** Do <em>not</em> factor the <em>numerators</em> when <em>adding</em> or
<em>subtracting</em> fractions.

**Steps:**

1. Factor the denomnators completely.

2. Look for common factors (not terms).

3. List the largest power of each different/unique factor.

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{8}{a}\text ,\frac{5}{a+2} $$

$$ LCD=a(a+2) $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{7x^2}{(x-4)^2}\text ,\frac{5x}{3(x-12)} $$

$$ LCD=3(x-4)^2(x-12) $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{2x^3}{(2x-1)^2}\text ,\frac{5x}{6x-3} $$

$$ \frac{2x^3}{(2x-1)(2x-1)}\text, \frac{5x}{3(2x-1)} $$

$$ LCD=3(2x-1)^2 $$

Whenever checking against these, just be sure each denominator is divisible by
the LCD, (i.e. it has each factor in it).

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{y+5}{y^2+2y-3}\text ,\frac{y+4}{y^2-3y+2} $$

Diamonds, two of them, let's go...

$$ y^2+2y-3 $$

$$ b=2 $$

$$ a\times c=-3 $$

$3$ and $-1$ satisfy.

$$ (y+3)(y-1) $$

Next diamond:

$$ y^2-3y+2 $$

$$ b=-3 $$

$$ a\times c=2 $$

$-1$ and $-2$ satisfy.

$$ (y-1)(y-2) $$

Thusly our fractions are factored thus:

$$ \frac{y+5}{(y+3)(y-1)}\text ,\frac{y+4}{(y-1)(y-2)} $$

Therefore:

$$ LCD=(y+3)(y-1)(y-2) $$

---

**Review:**

$$ \frac{x-5}{x^2+5x+4}\text ,\frac{x+8}{x^2-16} $$

First denominator is diamond:

$$ x^2+5x+4 $$

$$ b=5 $$

$$ a\times c=4 $$

$4$ and $1$ satisfy.

$$ (x+4)(x+1) $$

Thusly we factor our fractions further as such:

$$ \frac{x-5}{(x+4)(x+1)}\text ,\frac{x+8}{x^2-16} $$

$$ \frac{x-5}{(x+4)(x+1)}\text, \frac{x+8}{(x+4)(x-4)} $$

Thusly:

$$ LCD=(x+4)(x+1)(x-4) $$

---

**Interesting Case:**

Consider the following:

$$ \frac{6}{x-4}\text ,\frac{9}{4-x} $$

We could simply multiply to show our LCD:

$$ LCD=(x-4)(4-x) $$

But because we can always factor out a $-1$ we can rewrite our original
expression as:

$$ \frac{6}{x-4}\text ,\frac{9}{-1(-4+x)} $$

Which is:

$$ \frac{6}{x-4}\text ,\frac{9}{-1(x-4)} $$

Thusly our LCD instead would be:

$$ LCD=(x-4) $$

This is true because when we factor out the $-1$, we can simply move it to our
numerator instead. Our expression can look like this:

$$ \frac{6}{x-4}\text ,\frac{-9}{x-4} $$

Again, this allows our LCD statement is further simplified as:

$$ LCD=(x-4) $$

## Equivalent Rational Expressions

Ex.

$$ \frac{3}{5}=\frac{?}{15} $$

$$ \frac{3}{5}=\frac{9}{15} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{2x}{5y} = \frac{?}{20x^2y^2} $$

We can find the answer for $?$ by multiplying our initial fraction by

$$  \frac{4x^2y}{4x^2y} $$

Thusly:

$$ \frac{2x}{5y} = \frac{8x^3}{20x^2y^2} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{11y}{3y+2} = \frac{?}{15y+10} $$

$$ (3y+2)\times5 = 15y+10$$

Thusly:

$$ \frac{11y}{3y+2} = \frac{55y}{15y+10} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{3}{x^2-25} = \frac{?}{(x+5)(x-5)(x-3)} $$

$$ \frac{3}{(x+5)(x-5)} = \frac{?}{(x+5)(x-5)(x-3)} $$

$$ (x+5)(x-5)(x-3) = (x+5)(x-5)(x-3) $$

Thusly:

$$ \frac{3}{x^2-25} = \frac{3(x-3)}{(x+5)(x-5)(x-3)} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{3x}{5y} = \frac{?}{35xy^2} $$

$$ 5y(7)(x)(y) = 35xy^2 $$

Thusly:

$$ \frac{3x}{5y} = \frac{3x(7)(x)(y)}{35xy^2} $$

$$ \frac{3x}{5y} = \frac{21x^2y}{35xy^2} $$

---

Ex.

$$ \frac{3}{x^2-2x-15} = \frac{?}{(x-2)(x-5)(x+3)} $$

Diamond problem:

$$ x^2-2x-15 $$

$$ b=-2 $$

$$ a\times c=-15 $$

$-5$ and $3$ satisfy.

$$ (x-5)(x+3) $$

$$ \frac{3}{(x-5)(x+3)} = \frac{?}{(x-2)(x-5)(x+3)} $$

$$ (x-5)(x+3)(x-2) = (x-2)(x-5)(x+3) $$

Thusly:

$$ \frac{3}{x^2-2x-15} = \frac{3(x-2)}{(x-2)(x-5)(x+3)} $$
