# Graphing Logarithms with Transformations (Precalculus - College Algebra 56)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=swC7KrDO0Uo)

---

We're now going to briefly go over how to Graph Logarithms With Transformations.
The reason this section is brief is because we have gone over transformations
like shifts and reflections in multiple previous sections on graphing, and it
doesn't look all that different with Logarithms.

---

**A Brief Review Of Logarithms**

Logarithmic notation generally takes this form:

$$ f(x) = \log_{a}x $$

The _Domain_ of Logarithms, without transformations, consists of all real
positive numbers:

$$ \text{Domain for } f(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x > 0 \right\}$$

$$ \text{Domain for } f(x) \text{ : } (-\infty, -1) \cup (0, \infty) $$

The _Range_ of Logarithms, without transformations, consists of all real
numbers:

$$ \text{Range for } f(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | \text{ All Real Numbers} \right\} $$

$$ \text{Range for } f(x) \text{ : } (-\infty, \infty) $$

The Key Points that exist for all Logarithms, without transformations, are as
follows:

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{Key Points: } \\
(1, 0) \\
(a, 1) \\
\end{align*}
$$

Where $a$ is the _base_ of the Logarithm.

There is also a _Vertical Asymptote_ at $x = 0$ for all Logarithms, without
transformations.

When $a > 1$, the Logarithm ascends quickly from the fourth quadrant up through
the first quadrant, never touching the _Vertical Asymptote_:

![image 054_1](./054_1.png)

When $a < 1$, the Logarithm descends quickly from the first quadrant down
through the fourth quadrant, never touching the _Vertical Asymptote_:

![image 054_2](./054_2.png)

---

**Logarithms With Transformations**

Let's now dive in and take a look at our first Logarithmic Function with a
transformation, then graph it, and we'll go over why the graph behaves as it
does after the transformations:

$$ f(x) = 2 + \ln{(x - 1)} $$

We want to first get our function in order, much like how we want the highest
exponent to come first when evaluating a function, we also want to place our
logarithms first prior to evaluating:

$$ f(x) = \ln{(x - 1)} + 2 $$

Very much like previous transformations, we can get a quick idea of what is
going on just by going through or logic:

1. Anything happening inside of the function is a horizontal shift either left
   or right along the $x$-axis (moving left is by a positive number, moving
   right is by a negative number).

2. Anything happening outside of the function is a vertical shift either up ro
   down along the $y$-axis (moving up is by a positive number, moving down is by
   a negative number).

3. Any multiplication of the function will result in either a vertical stretch
   or compression of the function depending on whether that multiplier is
   greater than or less than $1$.

4. Any multiplication of the function by a _negative number_ will result in a
   reflection of the function.

Let's now also find some key points. Let's assume there was no transformation on
this function at all, we know that prior to transformations, our key points for
any logarithm are:

$$
\begin{align*}
(1, 0) \\
(a, 1) \\
\end{align*}
$$

Where $a$ is the base, since we know that the base of any natural logarithm is
$\mathbf{e}$, we know that are key points for this particular example Logarithm,
prior to transformations, are:

$$
\begin{align*}
(1, 0) \\
(\mathbf{e}, 1) \\
\end{align*}
$$

We also have a _Vertical Asymptote_ at $x = 0$.

Let's now apply our transformations.

We see that we have a shift inside our function of $-1$, this is a shift to the
right, this will shift both our key points along the $x$-axis to the right by
$1$. Wel also have a _Vertical Shift_ up by $2$. Taken together, this changes
our key points to:

$$
\begin{align*}
(2, 2) \\
(\mathbf{e} + 1, 2) \\
\end{align*}
$$

And Our _Vertical Asymptote_ also shifts to the right by $1$ to $x = 1$.

And our final graph looks something like this:

![image 054_3](./054_2.png)
