# Introduction To Functions (Precalculus - College Algebra 2)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FkUEsP9efFg)

## Intro To Functions

What is a Function? A Function is a relationship that maps one input to one
output.

An Input is commonly known as $x$-values.

And an output is commonly known as $y$ or $f(x)$ -values.

An input <em>never</em> gives more than one output.

---

## Function notation

A function is commonly denoted as:

$$ y = f(x) $$

Where $x$ is the <em>independent</em> variable.

And $y$ or $f(x)$ is known as the <em>dependent</em> variable.

$y$ or $f(x)$

Giving us an ordered pair that we can graph.

$$ (x, y) \text{ or } \left(x , f(x)\right) $$

---

**Example**

| Work Hours | Pay     |
| ---------- | ------- |
| $25$       | $\$500$ |
| $53$       | $\$310$ |
| $30$       | $\$490$ |
| $40$       | $\$490$ |

To determine if a relationship is a function, just determine if one input gives
one output. In this case, $25 \text{ hours}$ yields one value of $\$500$,
$53 \text{ hours}$ yields $\$310$. These are both functions as they have a
single input and a single output. The latter two are also functions, but it is
not a one to one relationship.

$$ \text{ INPUTS: } \{25, 53, 30, 40\} $$

$$ \text{ OUTPUTS: } \{\$500, \$310, \$490\}  $$

This leads to our next note of _Domains_ and _Ranges_.

- Domain: Set of inputs ($x$'s).

- Range: Set of outputs ($y$'s)

$$ \text{ DOMAIN: } \{25, 53, 30, 40\} $$

$$ \text{ RANGE: } \{\$500, \$310, \$490\}  $$

---

$$ S = \{ (-2, 16), (-1, 4), (0, 3), (1, 4) \} $$

$$ R = \{ (-2, 5), (3, 9) , (5, 0), (-2, 6) \} $$

The question now, is is $S$ a function? This is a function because every input
gives exactly one output. There are no repeated inputs with different outputs.
There _are_ repeated outputs, but that doesn't matter, as long as a single input
doesn't produce two different outputs, it is a function. Now, what about $R$?

$R$ is not a function, or a _non-function_, due to the fact that $(-2, 5)$ and
$(-2, 6)$ are part of our set of coordinates. $-2$ produces two different
outputs, and thusly is not a function.

---

Let's now take a look at a few equation examples:

$$ y = -7x + 5 $$

$$ 2x - 4y = 8 $$

$$ y = 2x^2 - 5x + 4 $$

$$ y = \pm \sqrt{3 - 2x} $$

Firstly, we always need to solve for $y$. Everything looks good above, but $2x -
4y = 8$ isn't in the appropriate form:

$$ 2x - 4y = 8 $$

$$ -4y = 8 - 2x $$

$$ y = \frac{1}{2}x - 2 $$

Also note that $y = \pm \sqrt{3 - 2x}$ has _two_ outputs, both positive and
negative, and thusly is considered a _non-function_. Note that the equation $y =
\sqrt{3 - 2x}$ _would_ be considered a function, it is the plus/minus sign that
tells us there are more than one outputs.

Consider this when you are solving a simple equation:

$$ y^2 = x $$

To solve for $y$, we must simply take the square root:

$$ \sqrt{y^2} = \sqrt{x} $$

$$ y = \sqrt{x} $$

But this is incorrect.

$$ y \neq \sqrt{x} $$

Whenever you are solving for $y$, you must add the $\pm$ sign when taking the
square root:

$$ y = \pm \sqrt{x} $$

Note that this is not for a cube root or any odd number root, as you know from
algebra, but for any square or even number root, yes.

---

With this in mind, take a look at the following examples:

$$ 2x^2 + 3y^2 = 1 $$

$$ xy + 2y = 3x - 1 $$

$$ x^2 - 4y^2 = 1 $$

Note that we can generally very quickly assess whether the above are functions
or not, if $y$ has a power that is even, then there will be two outputs, and
thusly are _non-functions_.

Let's solve for each of these to get some practice.

---

$$ 2x^2 + 3y^2 = 1 $$

$$ 3y^2 = 1 - 2x^2 $$

$$ y^2 = \frac{1 - 2x^2}{3} $$

$$ y = \pm \sqrt{\frac{1 - 2x^2}{3}} $$

$$ y = \pm \sqrt{\frac{1}{3} - \frac{2}{3}x^2} $$

Again, the $\pm$ indicates that this is a _non-function_.

---

$$ x^2 - 4y^2 = 1 $$

$$ -4y^2 = -x^2 + 1 $$

$$ y^2 = \frac{1}{4}x^2 - \frac{1}{4} $$

$$ y^2 = \pm \sqrt{\frac{1}{4}x^2 - \frac{1}{4}} $$

$$ \boxed{\text{NON-FUNCTION}} $$

---

$$ xy + 2y = 3x - 1 $$

$$ y(x + 2) = 3x - 1 $$

$$ y = \frac{3x - 1}{x + 2} $$

$$ \boxed{\text{FUNCTION}} $$
