# Finding the Domain of Functions (Precalculus - College Algebra 4)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LvUCDcp6Z3k)

## Finding Domain

The _Domain_ is the set of inputs of a function that give a _real_ number
output.

**Two Problem Areas**

1. Square roots $\sqrt{\quad}$ inside must be _positive_.

2. Denominators $\frac{}{(\quad)}$ _cannot_ equal $0$.

---

$$ f(x) = \sqrt{5 - 4x} $$

$$ 5 - 4x \geq 0 $$

$$ -4x \geq -5 $$

$$ x \leq \frac{5}{4} $$

As long as $x$ is less than or equal to $\dfrac{5}{4}$, then $f(x)$ will always
produce _Real_ numbers, this defines the domain.

$$ \text{D: } x \leq \frac{5}{4} $$

This is more properly notated as such:

$$ \text{D: }\left\{x | x \leq \frac{5}{4} \right\} $$

Where the pipe symbol, $|$, represents the logical equivalent of "such that".

The other way of denoting this is using _interval notation_.

$$ \left(-\infty, \frac{5}{4}\right] $$

---

$$ g(t) = \frac{5t}{t^3 - 16t} $$

$$ t^3 - 16t = 0 $$

$$ t(t^2 - 16) = 0 $$

$$ t(t^2 - 16) = 0 $$

$$ t(t - 4)(t + 4) = 0 $$

$$ t \neq 0 \quad t \neq 4 \quad t \neq -4 $$

The $0$ will appear as a "hole" in our function graph, an empty dot indicating
that this one value is not part of our graph.

The $4$, and $-4$ are numbers that our function _cannot_ have, and create what
is known as a _Vertical Asymptote_.

A _Vertical Asymptote_ is essentially a "guardrail", a line, that our function
graph approaches, but _cannot_ cross, and essentially veers off towards positive
or negative infinity.

$$ \text{D: } \left\{t | \text{ALL REAL NUMBERS EXCEPT } t \neq 0, t \neq -4, t
\neq 4 \right\} $$

Doing this in interval notation can get a bit messy, here is how it looks:

$$ (-\infty, 4) \cup (-4, 0) \cup (0, 4) \cup (4, \infty) $$

---

**Examples**

Determine the domain of the following:

---

$$ f(x) = 3x^2 - 2x + 4 $$

Note that there are no square roots, no logarithms, and no fractions, this
indicates that our domain includes all real numbers:

$$ \text{D: } \left\{x | \text{ALL REAL NUMBERS} \right\} $$

Also written in interval notation as:

$$ (-\infty, \infty) $$

---

$$ h(x) = \frac{\sqrt{3x - 15}}{x - 4} $$

Note that we have two of our three scenarios to consider here when determining
the domain. We simply have to divide up the problem. Let's first determine what
$x$ cannot be in the denominator:

$$ x - 4 = 0 $$

$$ x \neq 4 $$

Now the square root in the numerator:

$$ 3x - 15 \geq 0 $$

$$ 3x \geq 15 $$

$$ x \geq 5 $$

$$ \text{D: } \left\{x | x \geq 5 \text{ AND } x \neq 4 \right\} $$

But this is redundant, as $x \geq 5$ includes not having $x$ equal to $4$.

$$ \text{D: } \left\{x | x \geq 5 \right\} $$

And the interval notation:

$$ [5, \infty) $$

Let's switch it up though, let's say our original equation is:

$$ h(x) = \frac{\sqrt{3x - 12}}{x - 4} $$

This would then evaluate in the numerator as:

$$ 3x - 12 \geq 0 $$

$$ 3x \geq 12 $$

$$ x \geq 4 $$

Now the denominator evaluation:

$$ x \neq 0 $$

Becomes relevant, as this alternate statement says it _cannot_ equal four.
Thusly our domain in this case would be redefined as:

$$ \text{D: } \left\{x | x > 4\right\} $$

Or:

$$ (4, \infty) $$

Let's switch it up again:

$$ h(x) = \frac{\sqrt{3x - 9}}{x - 4} $$

$$ 3x - 9 \geq 0 $$

$$ 3x  \geq 9 $$

$$ x \geq 3 $$

This indicates that $x$ must be both greater than or equal to $3$, but also
cannot equal four.

$$ \text{D: } \left\{x | x \geq 3 \text{ AND } x \neq 4 \right\} $$

$$ [3, 4) \cup (4, \infty) $$

---

$$ g(x) = \frac{5}{\sqrt{x - 8}}$$

The denominator has a square root in it. If this were on the numerator, we'd
right the limitation as:

$$ x - 8 \geq 0 $$

But we know that denominators cannot equal zero, so this gets rewritten as:

$$ x - 8 > 0 $$

$$ x > 8 $$

$$ \text{D: } \left\{x | x > 8 \right\} $$

$$ (8, \infty) $$

---

Let's take one more example that can throw you off:

$$ \frac{5}{x^2 + 1} $$

$$ x^2 + 1 = 0 $$

But think about it, this expression can _never_ equal 0. Because $x^2$ will
always be positive, regardless of the sign of $x$, the denominator will _never_
be 0.

Thusly in this case, our domain is _all real numbers_, $(-\infty, \infty)$.

What if we change our denominator to $\sqrt{x^2 + 1}$?

Well, the same thing actually. Let's evaluate it as our previous example:

$$ \sqrt{x^2 + 1} > 0 $$

Again, because $x^2$ _must_ be positive, this indicates that $x^2 + 1$ will
always be greater than 0 (now if we were to _subtract_ $1$, that would be a
different story...). So once again, our domain is _all real numbers_,
$(-\infty, \infty)$.

If our denomintor is a constant like so:

$$ \frac{x - 2}{4} $$

Where $4$ is a constant, then our domain would once again, include _all real
numbers_.
