# The Square Root Method in Solving Quadratics (Precalculus - College Algebra 17)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mXAd6rkNSK0)

---

## Quadratics - Square Root Method

We'll start talking about the four techniques used to solve Quadratic Formulas.
The first we will cover is the Square Root Method. We will cover these topics in
the order that you should approach Quadratic Formula Problems, and this method,
the Square Root Method, is the first one you should try when solving them.

The Square Root Method essentially asks:

> "Can I solve this Quadratic Formula by taking the square root on both sides of
> the equation?"

In other words, once $f(x)$ is set to $0$, can we take the square root of both
sides without having any other polynomials left (_i.e._ no other powers of $x$)?

Recall that whenever adding a square root method to our solution (and not within
the problem statement), that we absolutely must remember to include the
plus/minus sign, $\pm$, as taking the square root (or any even radicand), could
result in both a positive and negative number.

Let's now hammer home this method by looking at a few examples.

---

**Examples**

---

$$ f(x) = x^2 - 18 $$

First of all, do we have a Parabola? Yes. It is an upward opening parabola (as
indicated by the positive $a$ of the $x^2$). Let's first set our equation to
$0$.

$$ x^2 - 18 = 0 $$

To determine if the Square Root Method is the best approach here, we'll need to
determine if we can isolate the constant $x^2$ away from the other constants. In
this case, we can:

$$ x^2 = 18 $$

Now we can take the square root of both sides:

$$ \sqrt{x^2} = \sqrt{18} $$

But recall, we must include the $\pm$ whenever we take the square root in our
solution.

$$ \sqrt{x^2} = \pm \sqrt{18} $$

And now we simplify:

$$ x = \pm 3\sqrt{2} $$

And be clear, the solution is written explicitly as:

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = 3\sqrt{2} \\
x = -3\sqrt{2} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

This is an example of our graph _crossing the $x$-axis twice_.

Let's take a look at another example.

---

$$ f(x) = 3x^2 - 33 $$

We'll go more quickly this time. Let's simply solve.

$$ 3x^2 - 33 = 0 $$

$$ 3x^2 = 33 $$

$$ x^2 = 11 $$

$$ \sqrt{x^2} = \pm \sqrt{11} $$

$$ x = \pm \sqrt{11} $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = \sqrt{11} \\
x = -\sqrt{11} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

This is another example of the _parabola crossing the $x$-axis twice_. This is
what is known as an _exact solution_.

---

$$ g(x) = (x + 2)^2 - 1 $$

$$ (x + 2)^2 - 1 = 0 $$

$$ (x + 2)^2 = 1 $$

$$ \sqrt{(x + 2)^2} = \pm \sqrt{1} $$

$$ x + 2 = \pm \sqrt{1} $$

$$ x = -2 \pm 1 $$

$$
\begin{align*}
x = -2 + 1 \\
x = -2 - 1 \\
\end{align*}
$$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = -1 \\
x = -3 \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

Notice here that we are shifting _down_ the $y$-axis by the _shift_ by $-1$. We
also are _shifting left_ by $2$. Simply see the initial problem statement and
this should hopefully be apparent to you considering our coverage of the
previous sections. This is another example of the _parabola crossing the
$x$-axis twice_.

---

$$ h(x) = (2x + 3)^2 - 32 $$

$$ (2x + 3)^2 - 32 = 0 $$

$$ (2x + 3)^2 = 32 $$

$$ \sqrt{(2x + 3)^2} = \pm \sqrt{32} $$

$$ 2x + 3 = \pm 4\sqrt{2} $$

$$ 2x = -3 \pm 4\sqrt{2} $$

$$ x = \frac{-3 \pm 4\sqrt{2}}{2} $$

$$ x = -\frac{3}{2} \pm 2\sqrt{2} $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = -\frac{3}{2} + 2\sqrt{2} \\
x = -\frac{3}{2} - 2\sqrt{2} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

Although the form is somewhat complicated looking, this is still an example of
an _exact solution_.

---

$$ f(x) = (x - 7)^2 $$

Ahead of time, we'll let you know that this an example of the _parabola touching
the $x$-axis 1 time_. Let's solve to see why.

$$ (x - 7)^2 = 0 $$

Right off the bat, we should know that this is _shifting to the right_ by $7$.
Additionally, we know from the more simple example:

$$ x^2 = 0 $$

That this results in a classic parabola with a single Vertex sitting right at
the center of the graph, $(0, 0)$. The parabola has one vertex that is indeed
touching the $x$ axis. So this is an example of the parabola just being shifted
to the right by $7$, and in fact, if we solve our equation, we'll find that
indeed, we have only one real solution for $x$.

$$ \sqrt{(x - 7)^2} = \pm \sqrt{0} $$

$$ x - 7 = \pm 0 $$

$$ x = 7 \pm 0 $$

$$
\begin{align*}
x = 7 + 0 \\
x = 7 - 0 \\
\end{align*}
$$

$$ \boxed{x = 7} $$

This is also known as a _Double Root_, which leads into the future topic of
_Multiplicity_.

---

$$ f(x) = (3x - 2)^2 + 75 $$

If we think about this for just a moment, we'll see that this produces _no real
solution_.

$$ (3x - 2)^2 + 75 = 0 $$

$$ (3x - 2)^2 = -75 $$

$$ \sqrt{(3x - 2)^2} = \pm \sqrt{-75} $$

$$ 3x - 2 = \pm \sqrt{75}i $$

$$ 3x - 2 = \pm 5\sqrt{3}i $$

$$ 3x = 2 \pm 5\sqrt{3}i $$

$$ x = \frac{2 \pm 5\sqrt{3}i}{3} $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = \frac{2 + 5\sqrt{3}i}{3} \\
x = \frac{2 - 5\sqrt{3}i}{3} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

We can plainly see that there are _no real solutions_ to this equation, and we
can ascertain that this graph would _not touch the $x$-axis at all_.
