# Using Factoring to Solve Quadratics (Precalculus - College Algebra 18)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u2CFHYJWS60)

---

## Quadratic - Factoring

Factoring is a classic way of solving equations, Quadratics included. Let's dive
right in with some examples.

---

**Examples**

---

$$ f(x) = x^2 + 7x + 6 $$

Let's start as we always do, by setting $f(x) = 0$.

$$ x^2 + 7x + 6 = 0 $$

Note that when using factoring to solve, we will _never get imaginary numbers_.

Let's also juxtapose this with the Square Root Method from the previous section
to understand why or why not we would use it. Recall that the Square Root Method
worked _because we could isolate the power $2$_. Can we do that here?
Technically we could, but by isolating $x^2$ by itself, we would not get a
constant on the other side of the eqaution (because of the presence of another
polynomial with $x$, the $7x$). We could make this work by _Completing the
Square_.

In order to factor properly, we need to ensure that $a$ is positive, as it makes
factoring far easier. Professor Leonard uses a method called the _Diamond
Method_, simply see the video for this method as it is hard to document here.

We'll cover the essential idea behind factoring here. Consider the following
template for our Quadratic Equation:

$$ ax^2 + bx + c = 0 $$

We can take $b$ and compare it to $a \times c$. What we want to find is two
numbers that either are the _sum_ or the _difference_ that add up or subtract to
$b$, but multiply to create $a \times c$. If $b$ is negative, then the two
numbers will be opposite signs, otherwise, they will be positive. In this case
$b$ is positive, and we can ascertain that our two numbers that will be plugged
into our factors are $1$ and $6$.

$$ x^2 + 1x + 6x + 6 = 0  $$

Note that documenting it like above may seem like an extra step, which it would
be if $a$ always equaled $1$, but that is not always the case.

$$ (x + 1)(x + 6) = 0 $$

The _Zero Product Property_ states that two factors equal $0$ is if one or the
other factor is equal to $0$.

$$ x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ x = -1 $$

$$ x + 6 = 0 $$

$$ x = -6 $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = -1 \\
x = -6 \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

Let's move onto an example where $a$ is not $1$ to demonstrate further.

---

$$ g(x) = 3x(x - 4) - 36 $$

$$ 3x(x - 4) - 36 = 0 $$

Let's first try to solve using the _Square Root Method_. Do we have a
multiplicand that we can take the square root of? No, we don't. Thusly, the
_Square Root Method_ is off the table for this problem. We could use _Completing
the Square_ to utilize it, but this particular problem is not a good candidate
for using the _Square Root Method_. Instead, we'll use factoring. Let's start by
distributing into the proper form.

$$ 3x^2 - 12x - 36 = 0 $$

We can further simplify our problem by taking out the GCF(Greatest Common
Factor), in this case, that is $3$.

$$ 3(x^2 - 4x - 12) = 0 $$

Note here that $b$ is negative, thusly our two factors will include different
signs. Again, we want two numbers that add up to $-4$ and multiply to get $-12$.
In this case that would be $-6$ and $2$. We can then plug that in like so:

$$ 3(x^2 - 6x + 2x - 12) = 0 $$

Please note that by putting the negative polynomial first, we avoid sign errors
later on, as reversing this would require us to adjust the sign of our constant,
$c$.

This now further factors to:

$$ 3\left[x(x - 6) + 2(x - 6)\right] = 0 $$

$$ 3(x - 6)(x + 2) = 0 $$

$$ x - 6 = 0 $$

$$ x = 6 $$

$$ x + 2 = 0 $$

$$ x = -2 $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = 6 \\
x = -2 \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

$$ g(x) = 3x^2 + 2 + 5x  $$

Let's get this into proper form for factoring.

$$ 3x^2 + 5x + 2 = 0 $$

If we try, as we did in our previous example, to factor out a GCF, we are unable
to. Nevertheless, we can still factor this.

Recall that we compare $b$ with the product of $a \times c$. Whatever two
numbers sum/difference to $b$ and produce the product $a \times $c will be the
two numbers we factor. In this case we are comparing $5$ with $6$. What adds to
$5$ and multiplies to $6$? That would be $3$ and $2$.

Recall that from our first example we said that the extra step was necessary.
Consider if this expresses our solution:

$$ (x + 3)(x + 2) = 0 $$

Does this work? No, because $a$ was not $1$, we cannot simply skip the step and
do this.

$$ \cancel{(x + 3)(x + 2) = 0} $$

So let's do this right, and split up our middle term.

$$ 3x^2 + 3x + 2x + 2 = 0 $$

And we can further simplify from here.

$$ 3x(x + 1) + 2(x + 1) = 0 $$

$$ (3x + 2)(x + 1) = 0 $$

$$ 3x + 2 = 0 $$

$$ 3x = -2 $$

$$ x = -\frac{2}{3} $$

$$ x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ x = -1 $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = -\frac{2}{3} \\
x = -1 \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

$$ h(x) = -2x^2 - 5x + 12 $$

Notice right away that this will be a _downward_ opening parabola. Solving this
is very similar to our previous examples, let's get started.

$$ -2x^2 - 5x + 12 = 0 $$

$$ -1(2x^2 + 5x - 12) = 0 $$

A small note here. The $x$-intercepts of both the positive and negative
expression of Quadratic Equations will be the same. Only the direction of the
parabola changes depending on the sign of $a$.

Again, we're looking for what adds up or subracts to $b$ an multiplies to $a
\times c$. In this case $b$ is $5$ and $a \times c$ is $-24$. Since $a \times
c$ is negative, this means that we want two numbers that subtract to $b$. What
subtracts to $5$ and multiplies to $-24$? In this case, that would be $-3$ and
$8$.

So now we simply write this out in place of $b$:

$$ -1(2x^2 - 3x + 8x - 12) = 0 $$

Again, we put the _negative_ constant first so we don't have any trouble with
our signs.

Now we factor.

$$ -1(x(2x - 3) + 4(2x - 3)) = 0 $$

$$ -1(x + 4)(2x - 3) = 0 $$

$$ x + 4 = 0 $$

$$ x = -4 $$

$$ 2x - 3 = 0 $$

$$ 2x = 3 $$

$$ x = \frac{3}{2} $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = -4 \\
x = \frac{3}{2} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

The next two are some special cases.

$$ f(x) = -12x + 9 + 4x^2 $$

Let's start by getting this into proper form.

$$ 4x^2 - 12x + 9 = 0 $$

Again, can we use the _Square Root Method_? Right off the bat, it's not likely,
at least as it stands right now, due to the presence of the $-12x$. But can we
factor? Yes.

Firstly, can we factor out a GCF? No, there is no GCF that divides into $4$,
$-12$, and $9$. So let's find what adds up to $-12$ and multiplies to $36$.
Since we have a negative sign for $b$ and a positive sign for $a \times c$, this
means that we have two negative numbers for our factors. In this case it would
be $-6$ and $-6$.

$$ 4x^2 - 6x - 6x + 9 = 0 $$

$$ 2x(2x - 3) - 3(2x - 3) = 0 $$

$$ (2x - 3)(2x - 3) = 0 $$

$$ 2x - 3 = 0 $$

$$ 2x = 3 $$

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{3}{2}} $$

While we do have two solutions, we only have one _unique_ solution, an example
of our parabola having one point that crosses the $x$-axis. One Vertex, one
$x$-intercept. This is called a _Double Root_.

Note also that in our solution above, we could at one point written our equation
as:

$$ (2x - 3)^2 = 0 $$

Which looks alot like a candidate for the _Square Root Method_.

---

$$ g(x) = x^2 - 5 $$

At this point, it hopefully is obvious to you that this will be an upward
opening parabola shifted downward by $5$ units on our graph.

$$ x^2 - 5 = 0 $$

Note here that this would be an obvious candidate for the _Square Root Method_.
In fact, some might assume that this formula is actually not factorable, but
that's not the case. Consider the following:

$$ x^2 - (\sqrt{5})^2 = 0 $$

While not easy on the eyes, this demonstrates that technically any equation is
factorable.

$$ (x - \sqrt{5})(x + \sqrt{5}) = 0 $$

And this gives us the same answer we would have gotten from the _Square Root
Method_.

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = \sqrt{5} \\
x = -\sqrt{5} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

This knowledge will come more into play when solving _Linear Equations_ in the
near future.
