# Completing the Square Made Easy (Precalculus - College Algebra 19)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pYSYL_vy6YQ)

---

Despite the fact that we have many ways to solve Quadratic Formulas, the
_Completing the Square Method_ is equally important to learn. Not just in it
granting yet another ability to us to solve Quadratic Formulas, but because this
method ends up showing up in other fields of Mathematics like Trigonometry and
Calculus when solving subintegrals.

Before we get started, please understand these two principles:

1. _Completing The Square_ is taking a Quadratic Equation and forcing it to
   conform to the form of a _Perfect Square_ so that we can then utilize the
   _Square Root Method_ to solve it.

2. Anything done on one side of an equation must be done on the other side. You
   must _balance_ the equation. Consider this example:

   $$ 7 + 2 - 2 = 7 $$

   This is true! We can use this cancelling out by inverses to help us solve
   equations that are not easily factorable.

---

**Examples**

---

$$ x^2 - 6x + 9 = 0 $$

Using the methods from the previous section on Factoring, we can easily
ascertain that two numbers that both add up to $b$ and multiply to $a \times c$
are $-3$ and $-3$.

$$ (x - 3)(x - 3) = 0 $$

Or

$$ (x - 3)^2 = 0 $$

But consider if we didn't have the $9$ in our original problem statement:

$$ x^2 - 6x = 0 $$

How would we solve this? We still can find the value(s) for $x$, but in this
case we would want to use the _Completing The Square_ method.

---

$$ f(x) = x^2 + 4x - 3 $$

$$ 0 = x^2 + 4x - 3 $$

We cannot easily factor this. There are no two numbers that easily come to mind
that add up to $4$ and multiply to $-3$. Alot of the times, at this point, we
might be inclined to reach for the _Quadratic Formula_, and indeed, that method
works every time despite it's extra bit of arithmetic work to get right. That
said, the _Completing The Square_ method will also work here. Let's see it in
action.

We will _Force Factoring To Happen_ here. Let's start by just spacing out the
$-3$ away from the rest of our formula (don't get rid of it).

$$ 0 = x^2 + 4x \quad - 3 $$

We need to find two numbers that are the same that sum up to $4$, in this case
that would be $2$ and $2$. We are looking to create a square here that wasn't
there before, so we can factor it. Consider this:

$$ x^2 +4x \neq (x + 2)(x + 2) $$

How can we get these to be equal? Well distributing our right hand side yields:

$$ x^2 + 4x + 4 $$

If we plug this in, it now looks like:

$$ 0 = x^2 + 4x + 4 \quad - 3 $$

But remember, we can't just add $4$ here, but we can add and subtract $4$:

$$ 0 = x^2 + 4x + 4 \quad - 4 - 3 $$

And now we can complete the square like so:

$$ 0 = x^2 + 4x + 4 - 7 $$

$$ 0 = (x + 2)^2 - 7 $$

From here, we now can solve this just like the _Square Root Method_:

$$ \sqrt{(x + 2)^2} = \pm \sqrt{7} $$

$$ x = -2 \pm \sqrt{7} $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = -2 + \sqrt{7} \\
x = -2 - \sqrt{7} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

$$ g(x) = x^2 - 3x + 1 $$

$$ x^2 - 3x + 1 = 0 $$

Again, no two numbers both add up to $-3$ and multiply to $1$. Let's separate
out our third term to determine what we can factor.

$$ x^2 - 3x \quad + 1 = 0 $$

Again, we want two numbers that are the same that add up to $-3$, that is a
fraction in this case, $-\dfrac{3}{2}$. This number, when multiplied by itself
(_i.e._ squared), we get $\dfrac{9}{4}$. Thusly we can both add and subtract
that to our original formula to complete the square:

$$ \left(x^2 - 3x + \frac{9}{4}\right) \quad - \frac{9}{4} + 1 = 0 $$

$$ \left(x - \frac{3}{2}\right)^2 - \frac{9}{4} + 1 = 0 $$

$$ \left(x - \frac{3}{2}\right)^2 - \frac{5}{4} = 0 $$

$$ \left(x - \frac{3}{2}\right)^2 = \frac{5}{4} $$

And once again, from here we can use the _Square Root Method_:

$$ \sqrt{\left(x - \frac{3}{2}\right)^2} = \pm \sqrt{\frac{5}{4}} $$

$$ x - \frac{3}{2} = \pm \sqrt{\frac{5}{4}} $$

$$ x = \frac{3}{2} \pm \frac{\sqrt{5}}{2} $$

$$ x = \frac{3 \pm \sqrt{5}}{2} $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = \frac{3 + \sqrt{5}}{2} \\
x = \frac{3 - \sqrt{5}}{2} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

$$ h(x) = 5x^2 - 10x + 2 $$

$$ 5x^2 - 10x + 2 = 0 $$

Again, we want to always try our other methods first, _Square Root Method_, and
_Factoring_, in that order. In this case, neither of those methods will work
easily, so now we are left with _Completing The Square_ (and, also the
_Quadratic Formula_).

Let's space out our equation as before.

$$ 5x^2 - 10x \quad + 2 = 0 $$

But now notice that $a$ is no longer $1$, but rather $5$, this will complicate
things quite a bit, and in all honesty, at this point you'd more than likely
just reach for the _Quadratic Formula_, but let's complete the square here just
to show how we could do it that way. The best scenario for the _Completing The
Square_ method is if $a$ is $1$, so let's factor out the $5$ to force it into
that form:

$$ 5(x^2 - 2x \quad ) \quad + 2 = 0 $$

Notice the spacing here, this is to indicate that we will need to add and
subtract a number to force this into a factorable form.

First we need two numbers that are the same that add up to $-2$, that would be
$-1$. Then we take those two numbers and find the product of them, which in this
case is $1$. When we can plug that in.

$$ 5(x^2 - 2x + 1) \quad + 2 = 0 $$

But we still need to subtract out anything we add... but that $5$... We'll need
to distribute it first before subtracting it. $5 \times 1 = 5$, thusly we can
subtract $5$ in the other spacing to get this to work:

$$ 5(x^2 - 2x + 1) - 5 + 2 = 0 $$

This now simplifies to:

$$ 5(x - 1)^2 - 3 = 0 $$

And we can use the _Square Root Method_ after some basic algebra after this.

$$ 5(x - 1)^2 = 3 $$

$$ (x - 1)^2 = \frac{3}{5} $$

$$ \sqrt{(x - 1)^2} = \pm \sqrt{\frac{3}{5}} $$

$$ x - 1 = \pm \sqrt{\frac{3}{5}} $$

$$ x = 1 \pm \sqrt{\frac{3}{5}} $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = 1 + \sqrt{\frac{3}{5}} \\
x = 1 - \sqrt{\frac{3}{5}} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

Let's start off with some more complicated examples now. Consider the following:

$$ g(x) = x^2 + \frac{2}{3}x - \frac{1}{3} $$

Alot of the times, at this point, we would just reach for the _Quadratic
Formula_. But we are practicing the _Completing The Square_ method so we are
familiar with it as they relate to other later topics. Let's start, as always,
by setting our equation equal to $0$.

$$ x^2 + \frac{2}{3}x - \frac{1}{3} = 0 $$

Once again, let's space out our constant:

$$ \left(x^2 + \frac{2}{3}x \quad \right) \quad - \frac{1}{3} = 0 $$

Once again, we need two numbers that add up to $\dfrac{2}{3}$. Easy enough,
$\dfrac{1}{3}$ fits the bill. Then multiplying those two numbers yields
$\dfrac{1}{9}$. Let's fill that in:

$$ \left(x^2 + \frac{2}{3}x + \frac{1}{9} \right) \quad - \frac{1}{3} = 0 $$

But we also need to subtract it:

$$ \left(x^2 + \frac{2}{3}x + \frac{1}{9} \right) - \frac{1}{9} - \frac{1}{3} = 0 $$

Which yields:

$$ \left(x + \frac{1}{3}\right)^2 - \frac{4}{9} = 0 $$

Which we now can use the _Square Root Method_ on like so:

$$ \left(x + \frac{1}{3}\right)^2 = \frac{4}{9} $$

$$ \sqrt{\left(x + \frac{1}{3}\right)^2} = \pm \sqrt{\frac{4}{9}} $$

$$ x + \frac{1}{3} = \pm \frac{2}{3} $$

$$ x = -\frac{1}{3} \pm \frac{2}{3} $$

$$ x = -\frac{1}{3} + \frac{2}{3} $$

$$ x = \frac{1}{3} $$

$$ x = -\frac{1}{3} - \frac{2}{3} $$

$$ x = -\frac{3}{3} $$

$$ x = -1 $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = \frac{1}{3} \\
x = -1 \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

$$ f(x) = 3x^2 + x - \frac{1}{2} $$

$$ 3x^2 + x - \frac{1}{2} = 0 $$

In this case, we can actually get rid of our fractions by multiplying both sides
by $2$:

$$ 2(3x^2 + x - \frac{1}{2}) = 2(0) $$

$$ 6x^2 + 2x - 1= 0 $$

This looks like a candidate for a classic _Factoring_ Method problem, so now
what adds up to $2$ and multiplies to $-6$? Hmm, nothing apparent. So now what?
Well, let's go back to our original problem statement (after we set it to $0$)
and try and _Complete The Square_ :

$$ 3x^2 + x \quad - \frac{1}{2} = 0 $$

Recall that in order to _Complete The Square_, $a$ has to be $1$, so let's
factor out that $3$:

$$ 3\left(x^2 + \frac{1}{3}x \quad \right) \quad - \frac{1}{2} = 0 $$

A number adds up to $\dfrac{1}{3}$ would be $\dfrac{1}{6}$. And $\dfrac{1}{6}$
multiplied by itself would be $\dfrac{1}{36}$. We can plug that in like so:

$$ 3\left(x^2 + \frac{1}{3}x + \frac{1}{36}\right) \quad - \frac{1}{2} = 0 $$

In order to subtract what we need, we'll need to distribute the $3$ to the
$\dfrac{1}{36}$ which is $\dfrac{3}{36}$, or $\dfrac{1}{12}$.

$$ 3\left(x^2 + \frac{1}{3}x + \frac{1}{36}\right) - \frac{1}{12} - \frac{1}{2} = 0 $$

$$ 3\left(x + \frac{1}{6} \right)^2 - \frac{7}{12} = 0 $$

And now we solve using the _Square Root Method_:

$$ 3\left(x + \frac{1}{6} \right)^2 = \frac{7}{12} $$

$$ \left(x + \frac{1}{6} \right)^2 = \frac{7}{12} \times \frac{1}{3} $$

$$ \left(x + \frac{1}{6} \right)^2 = \frac{7}{36} $$

$$ \sqrt{\left(x + \frac{1}{6} \right)^2} = \pm \sqrt{\frac{7}{36}} $$

$$ x + \frac{1}{6} = \pm \frac{\sqrt{7}}{6} $$

$$ x = -\frac{1}{6} \pm \frac{\sqrt{7}}{6} $$

$$ x = \frac{-1 \pm \sqrt{7}}{6} $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = \frac{-1 + \sqrt{7}}{6}  \\
x = \frac{-1 - \sqrt{7}}{6}  \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

$$ h(x) = -2x^2 + 5x - 7 $$

This time, let's prep for how we will solve using the _Completing The Square_
method in the future, we'll leave the function as is.

$$ h(x) = -2x^2 + 5x \quad - 7 $$

$$ h(x) = -2\left(x^2 - \frac{5}{2}x \quad \right) \quad - 7 $$

Again, we need two numbers that are the same that add up to $-\dfrac{5}{2}$.
This would be $-\dfrac{5}{4}$. The product of
$-\dfrac{5}{4} \times -\dfrac{5}{4}$ is $\dfrac{25}{16}$. We plug that in:

$$ h(x) = -2\left(x^2 - \frac{5}{2}x + \frac{25}{16} \right) \quad - 7 $$

And we have to distribute and zero it out:

$$ h(x) = -2\left(x - \frac{5}{4} \right)^2 + \frac{25}{8} - 7 $$

$$ h(x) = -2\left(x - \frac{5}{4} \right)^2 - \frac{31}{8} $$

We'll stop here, as the answer will get quite messy, but ultimately you can set
$h(x)$ to $0$ here and we would find two real $x$-intercepts.
