# Proving the Quadratic Formula - Twice (Precalculus - College Algebra 20)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2BUg_w1Cu9E)

---

In this lesson, we are going to do a quick proof of the _Quadratic Formula_.

Consider the following classic forms:

$$ f(x) = ax^2 + bx + c $$

Which we often set to $0$ like so:

$$ ax^2 + bx + c = 0 $$

Before continuing, let's discuss our previous techniques. Thus far we have
covered The _Square Root_ Method, The _Factoring_ Method, and The _Completing
The Square_ Method.

The last method we covered, you may have noticed can get quite convoluted the
more complex our given equation is. It is rare that we use The _Completing The
Square_ Method. Why?

Ultimately, The _Completing The Square_ Method gives us a form that we can then
utilize The _Square Root_ Method on. Regardless, it is important that we
understand The _Completing The Square_ Method as The _Quadratic Formula_ cannot
technically work without the fundamental concepts behind it. Ultimately,
_Completing The Square_ shows up later in other topics, and is not something we
want to keep in the forefront of our arsenal when solving Quadratic Equations.

Thusly the recommended order of trying to solve Quadratic Equations is as
follows:

1. Set up the function to equal $0$.
2. Try to solve using The _Square Root_ Method.
3. Try to solve using The _Factoring_ Method.
4. Try to solve using The _Quadratic Formula_.

You'll note we are skipping The _Completing The Square_ Method here, it simply
is easier to solve using The _Quadratic Formula_ in this case. But don't let
that dissuade you from having a good grasp on _Completing The Square_, as,
again, it will come up again in the near future when covering other topics.

In fact, we'll now use _Completing The Square_ to prove the _Quadratic Formula_
to show how interrelated they are.

Recall our original classic formula:

$$ ax^2 + bx + c = 0 $$

Let's leave this without numbers and how would we use _Completing The Square_
Method here? Remember, we are _Forcing Factoring To Happen_. Let's space out our
formula as before:

$$ ax^2 + bx \quad + c = 0 $$

We then factor out our $a$:

$$ a\left(x^2 + \frac{b}{a}x \quad \right) \quad + c = 0 $$

Again, we want two numbers, that are exactly the same that add up to
$\dfrac{b}{a}$. This would be $\dfrac{b}{2a}$. And we also need the product of
these two, which is $\dfrac{b^2}{4a^2}$. We can now plug in this to our formula:

$$ a\left(x^2 + \frac{b}{a}x + \frac{b^2}{4a^2} \right) \quad + c = 0 $$

But we also need to subtract the distribution of this to ensure it remains the
same formula. Thusly we ditribute the $a$ to $\dfrac{b^2}{4a^2}$.

$$ a \times \frac{b^2}{4a^2} = \frac{ab^2}{4a^2} = \frac{b^2}{4a} $$

And we plug that in as a subtraction to cancel it out like so:

$$ a\left(x^2 + \frac{b}{a}x + \frac{b^2}{4a^2} \right) - \frac{b^2}{4a} + c = 0 $$

We now need to simplify and solve for $x$. First we need a common denominator to
combine like terms. In this case, we can take the $4a$ as our common
denominator:

$$ a\left(x^2 + \frac{b}{a}x + \frac{b^2}{4a^2} \right) - \frac{b^2}{4a} + \frac{4ac}{4a} = 0 $$

And now we simplify:

$$ a\left(x + \frac{b}{2a}\right)^2 =\frac{b^2}{4a} - \frac{4ac}{4a} = 0 $$

$$ a\left(x + \frac{b}{2a}\right)^2 = \frac{b^2 - 4ac}{4a} $$

$$ \left(x + \frac{b}{2a}\right)^2 = \frac{b^2 - 4ac}{4a} \times \frac{1}{a} $$

$$ \left(x + \frac{b}{2a}\right)^2 = \frac{b^2 - 4ac}{4a^2} $$

$$ \sqrt{\left(x + \frac{b}{2a}\right)^2} = \pm \sqrt{\frac{b^2 - 4ac}{4a^2}} $$

$$ x + \frac{b}{2a} = \pm \sqrt{\frac{b^2 - 4ac}{4a^2}} $$

$$ x = -\frac{b}{2a}  \pm \sqrt{\frac{b^2 - 4ac}{4a^2}} $$

$$ x = -\frac{b}{2a}  \pm \frac{\sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a} $$

And, finally, simplified down to the classic _Quadratic Formula_:

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a}} $$

---

## An Alternative Proof

Here is a slightly more "traditional" proof for the _Quadratic Formula_. Let's
start from the beginning:

$$ f(x) = ax^2 + bx + c $$

$$ ax^2 + bx + c = 0 $$

$$ \frac{ax^2}{a} + \frac{bx}{a} + \frac{c}{a} = 0 $$

$$ \left(x^2 + \frac{b}{a}x + \quad \right) \quad \frac{c}{a} = 0 $$

Notice the spacing above, we then complete the square as before:

Two numbers that are the same that add up to $\dfrac{b}{a}$ are $\dfrac{b}{2a}$,
and the product of those two numbers is $\dfrac{b^2}{4a^2}$, which we plug in:

$$ \left(x^2 + \frac{b}{a}x + \frac{b^2}{4a^2} \right) \quad \frac{c}{a} = 0 $$

In this case, we don't have to distribute the $a$ as before, we can simply
subtract that product easily on the outside of the parentheses.

$$ \left(x^2 + \frac{b}{a}x + \frac{b^2}{4a^2} \right) - \frac{b^2}{4a^2} + \frac{c}{a} = 0 $$

Now we factor and find the common denominator for the outside of the
parentheses:

$$ \left(x + \frac{b}{2a} \right)^2 - \frac{b^2}{4a^2} + \frac{4ac}{4a^2} = 0 $$

And from here we simplify and solve for $x$.

$$ \left(x + \frac{b}{2a} \right)^2 = \frac{b^2}{4a^2} - \frac{4ac}{4a^2} $$

$$ \left(x + \frac{b}{2a} \right)^2 = \frac{b^2 - 4ac}{4a^2} $$

$$ \sqrt{\left(x + \frac{b}{2a} \right)^2} = \pm \sqrt{\frac{b^2 - 4ac}{4a^2}} $$

$$ x + \frac{b}{2a} = \pm \sqrt{\frac{b^2 - 4ac}{4a^2}} $$

$$ x = -\frac{b}{2a} \pm \frac{\sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a} $$

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a}} $$
