# Using the Quadratic Formula (Precalculus - College Algebra 21)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KIWXZVsdpbE)

---

## Introduction

Unlike other methods covered previously, the _Quadratic Formula_ method of
solving Quadratic Equations works every time regardless of the conditions.

It does not require that the Squared polynomial be easily isolated from the rest
of the formula (_i.e._ the _Square Root_ method).

It does not require that the equation be easily factorable (_i.e._ the
_Factoring_ method).

It also does not require the sometimes cumbersome substituting in a value that
makes it possible to use the _Square Root_ method (_i.e._ the _Completing The
Square_ method).

It simply requires that the equation be Quadratic, that we set the equation
equal to $0$, and for us to plug in the values of $a$, $b$, and $c$ to find the
value of our $x$-intercepts.

Here is the classic _Quadratic Formula_:

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{For } ax^2 + bx + c = 0 \\
x = \frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a} \\
\end{align*}
$$

Let's get started with some examples:

---

**Examples**

---

$$ f(x) = 3x^2 - 5x + 1 $$

As before, we set this equal to $0$ as the first step, and set it in the
standard Quadratic Equation form:

$$ 3x^2 - 5x + 1 = 0 $$

Prior to using the _Quadratic Formula_, we want to always try and use our other
solutions first. Oftentimes, these other methods (except for the _Completing The
Square_ method) will result in finding the solution faster and more efficiently
than using the _Quadratic Formula_. We should always try to use the _Square
Root_ method first, and the _Factoring_ method second, before finally trying to
use the _Quadratic Formula_ method.

Because of the presence of $-5x$, we cannot easily use the _Square Root_ method,
so what about factoring? Well what are two numbers that add up to $-5$ and also
multiply to give us $3 \times 1$? There are no numbers that make this easily
factorable, so the _Factoring_ method also will not work easily here. We also
could check with _Completing The Square_, but we would immediately get some
fractions in our attempts to find $\dfrac{b}{2}$, and it would be cumbersome.
It'd be easier here to simply plug in some numbers using the _Quadratic
Formula_.

We can set up our quadratic formula in a way to ensure there are no sign errors
by writing it more succinctly like so:

$$ x = \frac{-(b) \pm \sqrt{(b)^2 - 4(a)(c)}}{2(a)} $$

We then simply plug in our coefficients for our example:

$$ 3x^2 - 5x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ x = \frac{-(-5) \pm \sqrt{(-5)^2 - 4(3)(1)}}{2(3)} $$

We can now just simplify from here:

$$ x = \frac{5 \pm \sqrt{25 - 12}}{6} \rightarrow x = \frac{5 \pm \sqrt{13}}{6}$$

If the _radicand_ (_i.e._ the _discriminant_) inside the square root part of our
equation is a _positive_ number, then we can be guaranteed to have two _real_
solutions. If it is _negative_, then we have no $x$-intercepts, and if it is $0$
then we have only one _real_ solution (an example of a _double root_).

Because we can no longer simplify our answer an further, we simply concisely
declare our answer like so:

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = \frac{5 + \sqrt{13}}{6} \\
x = \frac{5 - \sqrt{13}}{6} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

$$ g(x) = 3x(x + 2) - 1 $$

Here we have no obvious $a$, $b$, or $c$, and our function has yet to be set to
$0$, let's set this in proper form and set it to $0$ now.

$$ 3x^2 + 6x - 1 = 0 $$

Again, we check to see if other methods are possible. The _Square Root_ method
will not work here because $x$ is not easily forced to one side of the equation
due to the presence of $6x$. Can we use the _Factoring_ method? Well, what adds
up to $6$, but also multiplies to $-3$? Nothing easily comes to mind. So now we
can use the _Quadratic Formula_ to solve.

$$ x = \frac{-(6) \pm \sqrt{(6)^2 - 4(3)(-1)}}{2(3)} $$

Be wary of sign errors, notice here that $c$ is $-1$, this can throw students
off when simplifying inside the square root. Let's continue.

$$ x = \frac{-6 \pm \sqrt{36 + 12}}{6} \rightarrow x = \frac{-6 \pm \sqrt{48}}{6} \rightarrow x = \frac{-6 \pm 4\sqrt{3}}{6} \rightarrow x = -1 \pm \frac{2}{3}\sqrt{3} $$

And that gives us our answer, let's write this concisely:

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = -1 + \frac{2}{3}\sqrt{3} \\
x = -1 - \frac{2}{3}\sqrt{3} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

$$ h(x) = 3x^2 + x - \frac{1}{2} $$

$$ 3x^2 + x - \frac{1}{2} = 0 $$

Professor Leonard emphasizes with this particular example to _never_ plug in
fractions into the _Quadratic Formula_. While I personally have done this and
had no ill effect, it is likely I have not been frustrated by this due to the
use of a calculator when solving. Should I be doing this by hand, yes fractions
tend to add a layer of unnecessarily complexity, especially when there is only
one fraction like in this example. We can simplify this expression by simply
multiplying both sides of our equation by $2$.

$$ 2\left(3x^2 + x - \frac{1}{2}\right) = 2(0) $$

$$ 6x^2 + 2x - 1 = 0 $$

And now we proceed as usual. Can we solve using the _Square Root_ method? No,
the $2x$ throws us off there. What about _Factoring_? Well, what adds up to $2$,
but also multiplies to equal $-6$? That is not easily factorable. Time for the
_Quadratic Formula_.

$$ x = \frac{-(2) \pm \sqrt{(2)^2 - 4(6)(-1)}}{2(6)} $$

Again, beware when either $a$ or $c$ are _negative_, as this can lead to sign
errors inside of our radicand. Let's solve.

$$ x = \frac{-(2) \pm \sqrt{(2)^2 - 4(6)(-1)}}{2(6)} \rightarrow x = \frac{-2 \pm \sqrt{4 + 24}}{12} \rightarrow x = \frac{-2 \pm \sqrt{28}}{12} \rightarrow x = \frac{-2 \pm 2\sqrt{7}}{12} $$

$$ x = -\frac{1}{6} \pm \frac{1}{6}\sqrt{7} $$

Written more concisely, our answer is:

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = -\frac{1}{6} + \frac{1}{6}\sqrt{7} \\
x = -\frac{1}{6} - \frac{1}{6}\sqrt{7} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

$$ f(x) = \frac{1}{8}x^2 - \frac{1}{4}x - 2 $$

We can already see here we have two fractions, and with different denominators,
so in this case we'll need to look for an _LCD_ (Lowest Common Denominator) in
order to simplify this. Of course, we also need to set it to $0$, so let's do
that.

$$ \frac{1}{8}x^2 - \frac{1}{4}x - 2 = 0 $$

Here, the _LCD_ is $8$, so let's multiply both sides by $8$.

$$ 8\left(\frac{1}{8}x^2 - \frac{1}{4}x - 2\right) = 8(0) $$

$$ x^2 - 2x - 16 = 0 $$

Now let's see if the _Square Root_ method or the _Factoring_ method will work.
You can probably tell by this point that no, neither method will work easily.
Note that _Competing The Square_ method might actually work here, but we'll
simply use the _Quadratic Formula_ as that is the point of this section.

$$ x = \frac{-(-2) \pm \sqrt{(-2)^2 - 4(1)(-16)}}{2(1)} $$

And, yep, simplify.

$$ x = \frac{2 \pm \sqrt{4 + 64}}{2} \rightarrow x = \frac{2 \pm \sqrt{68}}{2} \rightarrow x = \frac{2 \pm 2\sqrt{17}}{2} \rightarrow x = 1 \pm \sqrt{17} $$

And our concise answer is:

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = 1 + \sqrt{17} \\
x = 1 - \sqrt{17} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

## A Brief Note

Keep in mind that these are _exact_ solutions in that we keep the square roots
expressed. In the last example, our answer included $\sqrt{17}$, this number is
an _irrational_ number with a decimal number that goes on forever. A calculator
will have to _round_ in order to express this number, and that is an
_approximation_. When presenting our answers for _Quadratic Equations_, we
always want to express our answers as _exact_ solutions, not _approximations_.

Additionally, keep in mind that these are points on a graph. Specifically they
are the $x$-intercepts. Thusly, we may be asked to present them as points,
which, for example from our last example, we could present like so:

$$ \boxed{\left(1 + \sqrt{17}, 0\right), \left(1 - \sqrt{17}, 0\right)} $$

Let's now move onto two more examples to show when we get one _real solution_
and when we get _no real solutions_.

---

**Examples**

---

$$ f(x) = 9x^2 - 6x + 1 $$

Let's set it to $0$ as always.

$$ 9x^2 - 6x + 1 = 0 $$

Again, we check the other methods here. In fact, the _Factoring_ method would
work here, $-3 - 3 = -6$, and $-3 \times -3 = 9$. But for the sake of this
section, let's solve using the _Quadratic Formula_.

$$ x = \frac{-(-6) \pm \sqrt{(-6)^2 - 4(9)(1)}}{2(9)} \rightarrow x = \frac{6
\pm \sqrt{36 - 36}}{18} \rightarrow x = \frac{6 \pm \sqrt{0}}{18} \rightarrow x
= \frac{6 \pm 0}{18} $$

Since $6 + 0$ and $6 - 0$ are equivalent expressions, we can simplify further by
simply omitting the $\pm 0$ expression.

$$ x = \frac{6}{18} \rightarrow x = \frac{1}{3} $$

This is an example of a _double root_. More simply termed "getting the same
answer twice". And thusly we have _one real solution_:

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{1}{3}} $$

---

$$ g(x) = -4x^2 - x - 4 $$

Here let's set it to $0$.

$$ -4x^2 - x - 4 = 0 $$

And we see that we have a negative coefficient for $-4x^2$. Note that this means
our graphed parabola will open up _downwards_, but to solve for where the
$x$-intercepts will be, it is always easiest to change the sign. We can do this
multiple ways, but the easiest might be to simply multiply each side by $-1$.

$$ -1(-4x^2 - x - 4) = -1(0) $$

$$ 4x^2 + x + 4 = 0 $$

Here, we try our other methods and obviously, none of them work here. Let's plug
it into the _Quadratic Formula_.

$$ x = \frac{-(1) \pm \sqrt{(1)^2 - 4(4)(4)}}{2(4)} $$

And simplify:

$$ x = \frac{-(1) \pm \sqrt{(1)^2 - 4(4)(4)}}{2(4)} \rightarrow x = \frac{-1 \pm
\sqrt{1 - 64}}{8} \rightarrow x = \frac{1 \pm \sqrt{-63}}{8} \rightarrow x =
\frac{1 \pm \sqrt{63}i}{8} $$

Running out of space, we simplify further from here:

$$ x = \frac{1 \pm 3i\sqrt{7}}{8} $$

And this can be expressed concisely as:

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = \frac{1 + 3i\sqrt{7}}{8} \\
x = \frac{1 - 3i\sqrt{7}}{8} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

Indeed, we have two _non-real_ solutions here. Two complex solutions. This means
that there are _no $x$-intercepts_.

Note here that our calculators cannot even give us an _approximation_ of these
values due to them including the imaginary number, $i$. Put quite simply, we
cannot plot these points on a graph.
