# Finding Intersections of Functions (Precaluclus - College Algebra 22)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2cXEuUazjCc)

---

This section will be relatively brief. Here we are simply finding where to
functions intersect and produce a point on a graph. Let's get starteda

---

**Examples**

---

Consider these two functions.

$$ f(x) = x^2 + 6x + 3 $$

$$ g(x) = 3 $$

In order to find where these functions intersect on the graph, we can set them
equal to each other, and solve for $x$. With this specific example, you'll
notice that one is a classic parabola shape ($f(x)$), and the other is a
constant $g(x)$. This means that long the horizontal line $g(x)$, we will find
one or two points where the two graphs meet.

$$ x^2 + 6x + 3 = 3 $$

Here we will utilize alot of what we have covered in previous sections. The
first thing we want to do is get all coefficients on one side and $0$ on the
other. We can do that simply here by subtracting $3$ from both sides.

$$ x^2 + 6x + 3 - 3 = 3 - 3 \rightarrow x^2 + 6x = 0 $$

Now we can use our various Quadratic Equation methods from the previous sections
to solve for $x$. The _Square Root_ method will not work because we cannot
easily isolate $x^2$ from $6x$, but we can _Factor_.

$$ x(x + 6) = 0 $$

And now we have two points:

$$ x = 0 $$

$$ x + 6 = 0 $$

$$ x = -6 $$

Unlike our solving of the _Quadratic Equation_ however, we are not looking for
$x$-intercepts, but rather the points at which these two graphs intersect. To do
that, we can plug in our values for $x$ into either $f(x)$ or $g(x)$ (or both),
and find the resulting values to plug into points. Let's take $x = 0$ as a quick
example:

First, simply set up a point:

$$ x = 0 $$

Thusly:

$$ (0, ?) $$

Where we want to know the value for the question mark. Now simply:

$$ f(0) = (0)^2 + 6(0) + 3 \rightarrow f(0) = 0 + 0 + 3 \rightarrow  f(0) = 3 $$

And that is the point:

$$ (0, 3) $$

Note here how this is true of $g(0)$ as well, every value plugged into $g(x)$
should return $3$. Now what about $x = -6$?

$$ x = -6 $$

$$ (-6, ?) $$

$$ f(-6) = (-6)^2 + 6(-6) + 3 \rightarrow f(-6) = 36 - 36 + 3 \rightarrow f(-6) = 0 + 3 \rightarrow f(-6) = 3 $$

And thusly our point is:

$$ (-6, 3) $$

Again, notice that $g(-6) = 3$.

Let's move onto a slightly more complicated example.

---

Consider the following two functions.

$$ f(x) = -2x^2 + 1 $$

$$ g(x) = 3x + 2 $$

Before we continue, simply sketch out the idea of the shape of these two graphs
in your head.

The first function, $f(x)$ is a parabola, it opens _downward_, is a bit _narrow_
due to $a$ being smaller than $-1$ (this would be reversed for positive
coefficients of $a$), and it is shifted upwards along the $y$-axis by $1$.

The second function, $g(x)$ is a slope, simply climbing diagonally positively.
It is shifted upwards along the $y$-axis by $2$.

Again, we set the functions equal to solve.

$$ -2x^2 + 1 = 3x + 2 $$

And we set everything to one side and $0$ on the other.

$$ -2x^2 + 1 - (3x + 2) = 0 $$

$$ -2x^1 + 1 - 3x - 2 = 0 $$

$$ -2x^2 - 3x - 1 = 0 $$

For the sake of ease of solving, let's also remove the negative coefficent for
$a$.

$$ 2x^2 + 3x + 1 = 0 $$

And now we solve for $x$ as done many times before. Perhaps we can _Factor_.

$$ (2x + 1)(x + 1) = 0 $$

Now we can solve for each point:

$$ 2x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ 2x = -1 $$

$$ x = -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ x = -1 $$

Again, we're not done here, we have two points that we need to plug into our
functions to find our points.

$$ \left(-\frac{1}{2}, ?\right) $$

$$ (-1, ?) $$

So let's plug our values into each function to find out.

$$ f(-1) = -2(-1)^2 + 1 \rightarrow f(-1) = -2(1) + 1 \rightarrow f(-1) = -2 + 1 \rightarrow f(-1) = -1 $$

We can solve this for $g(-1)$ as well:

$$ g(-1) = 3(-1) + 2 \rightarrow g(-1) = -3 + 2 \rightarrow g(-1) = -1 $$

So these both check out with our $y$-coordinate being $-1$, thusly one of our
final points is:

$$ (-1, -1) $$

Let's solve for our other point:

$$ \left(-\frac{1}{2}, ?\right) $$

$$ f\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right) = -2\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right)^2 + 1 $$

$$ f\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right) = -2\left(\frac{1}{4}\right) + 1 $$

$$ f\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right) = -\frac{1}{2} + 1 \rightarrow f\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right) = \frac{1}{2} $$

Let's check $g\left(-\dfrac{1}{2}\right)$ as well.

$$ g\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right) = 3\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right) + 2 $$

$$ g\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right) = -\frac{3}{2} + 2 \rightarrow g\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right) = \frac{1}{2} $$

So this checks out as well, thusly our two points are:

$$ \boxed{(-1, -1), \left(-\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{2} \right)} $$

---

Consider the following two functions:

$$ f(x) = x^2 - x + 1 $$

$$ g(x) = 2x^2 - 3x - 14 $$

Again, let's take a brief moment to visualize roughly what these two functions
look like. They are both parabolas, both opening _upwards_, with $g(x)$ being
more narrow than $f(x)$ due to $2$ being greater than $1$. It is highly likely
we will once again have two points of intersection. As before, set the two
functions equal and solve for $x$ to start:

$$ x^2 - x + 1 = 2x^2 - 3x - 14 $$

Now set one side equal to $0$:

$$ 0 = 2x^2 - 3x - 14 - (x^2 - x + 1) $$

$$ 0 = 2x^2 - 3x - 14 - x^2 + x - 1 $$

$$ 0 = x^2 - 2x - 15 $$

This looks like a candidate for _Factoring_. Both $-5$ and $3$ fit the bill in
this case:

$$ 0 = (x - 5)(x + 3) $$

And now solve for our two $x$-coordinates:

$$ x - 5 = 0 $$

$$ x = 5 $$

$$ x = -3 $$

And now we need to plug these two points in to find where they meet on the
$y$-axis.

$$ (5, ?) $$

$$ (-3, ?) $$

Let's solve for $f(5)$ first:

$$ f(5) = (5)^2 - (5) + 1 \rightarrow f(5) = 25 - 5 + 1 \rightarrow f(5) = 20 +
1 \rightarrow f(5) = 21 $$

Let's check $g(5)$ as well to be sure:

$$ g(5) = 2(5)^2 - 3(5) - 14 \rightarrow g(5) = 2(25) - 15 - 14 \rightarrow g(5) = 50 - 15 - 14 \rightarrow g(5) = 50 - 29 \rightarrow g(5) = 21 $$

So that checks out, our first point is:

$$ (5, 21) $$

Let's now check our second point with our two functions. Let's solve for $f(-3)$
first.

$$ f(-3) = (-3)^2 -(-3) + 1 $$

$$ f(-3) = 9 + 3 + 1 \rightarrow f(-3) = 12 + 1 \rightarrow f(-3) = 13 $$

Let's also check $g(-3)$ now:

$$ g(-3) = 2(-3)^2 - 3(-3) - 14 $$

$$ g(-3) = 2(9) + 9 - 14 $$

$$ g(-3) = 18 - 5 \rightarrow g(-3) = 13 $$

And that also checks out, so our second point is:

$$ (-3, 13) $$

Therefore our two points are:

$$ \boxed{\left[(5, 21), (-3, 13)\right]} $$
