# Using Substitutions to Solve Equations (Precalculus - College Algebra 23)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P8uoP-JFj54)

---

Here we will take equations that don't look like Quadratics Equations and use a
technique we've already seen called _Substitution_ to force it into the classic
Quadratic Equation form so that we can _Factor_ it. We will then go back to the
original equation to find the appropriate solution for the original polynomial
expression.

Let's dive in with our first example.

---

**Examples**

---

$$ g(x) = (3x + 4)^2 - 6(3x + 4) + 9 $$

The first step, as always, is set our function equal to $0$.

$$ (3x + 4)^2 - 6(3x + 4) + 9 = 0 $$

Here, you could distribute, but it might be cumbersome. Notice, however, that we
have similar terms that indicate what we want to substitute, $3x + 4$.
Typically, we use a variable denoted by the letter $u$, because it shows up
later in Calculus 2 in a method called a
[U-Sub](https://math.libretexts.org/Courses/Monroe_Community_College/MTH_210_Calculus_I_(Professor_Dean)/Chapter_5%3A_Integration/5.5%3A_U-Substitution).

Thusly we can set $u$ to our common term:

$$ u = 3x + 4 $$

And then we can write our original equation with the substitution, $u$, like so:

$$ u^2 - 6u + 9 = 0 $$

Now we can solve this like any other Quadratic Equation. This is easily
factorable like so:

$$ (u - 3)(u - 3) = 0 $$

Looks like we have a _double root_, so we only have one equation to solve for
$u$.

$$ u - 3 = 0 $$

$$ u = 3 $$

Of course, we haven't found $x$ yet, so let's solve for $x$ by removing the
substitution for the original:

$$ 3x + 4 = 3 $$

$$ 3x = 3 - 4 $$

$$ 3x = -1 $$

$$ \boxed{x = -\frac{1}{3}} $$

Let's double check our work, however, by plugging this value for $x$ back into
our original equation, and if it is correct, it should give us back $0$:

$$ g\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right) = \left(3\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right) + 4 \right)^2 -
6\left(3\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right) + 4 \right) + 9 $$

$$ g\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right) = \left(-1 + 4 \right)^2 - 6\left(-1 + 4\right) + 9 $$

$$ g\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right) = (3)^2 - 6(3) + 9 $$

$$ g\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right) = 9 - 18 + 9 $$

$$ g\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right) = -9 + 9 $$

$$ g\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right) = 0 $$

And indeed it gives us back $0$. So, our answer, once again, is:

$$ \boxed{x = -\frac{1}{3}} $$

---

$$ f(x) = 3x^4 - 2x^2 - 1 $$

This is not a quadratic, but it looks like one. Let's first note that the fact
that we have an exponential of $4$ in the $3x^4$ indicates that it is possible
for us to have _four_ solutions. As before, let's set this equal to $0$.

$$ 3x^4 - 2x^2 - 1 = 0 $$

Now, we can work substitution by finding common terms. To do that for this
example, we need to know the basics of exponents. Consider the following simple
fact about exponents:

$$ (x^2)^2 = x^4 $$

This means that we can write our equation as:

$$ 3(x^2)^2 - 2(x^2) - 1 = 0 $$

And we can substitute $u$ for $x^2$.

$$ u = x^2 $$

Rewriting our equation with our substitution thusly:

$$ 3u^2 - 2u - 1 = 0 $$

And now we can solve. This looks easily factorable:

$$ (3u + 1)(u - 1) = 0 $$

And now solve for $u$:

$$ 3u + 1 = 0 $$

$$ 3u = -1 $$

$$ u = -\frac{1}{3} $$

$$ u - 1 = 0 $$

$$ u = 1 $$

And then we can simply plug thes values back in for $x$:

$$ u = x^2 $$

$$ x^2 = -\frac{1}{3} $$

$$ x^2 = 1 $$

We can solve these by taking the square root:

$$ x^2 = 1 $$

$$ \sqrt{x^2} = \pm \sqrt{1} $$

$$ x = \pm 1 $$

And we have two solutions so far:

$$
\begin{align*}
x = 1 \\
x = -1 \\
\end{align*}
$$

And we do the same for the other value for $x^2$:

$$ x^2 = -\frac{1}{3} $$

$$ \sqrt{x^2} = \pm \sqrt{-\frac{1}{3}} $$

$$ \sqrt{x^2} = \pm \sqrt{-\frac{1}{3}} $$

$$ x = \pm \sqrt{\frac{1}{3}}i $$

$$ x = \pm \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}i $$

So our other two solutions are:

$$
\begin{align*}
x = \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}i \\
x = -\frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}i \\
\end{align*}
$$

Thusly our four solutions are:

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = 1 \\
x = -1 \\
x = \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}i \\
x = -\frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}i \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

We do note that due to the presence of two of our points being complex
solutions, that we cannot graph this.

Let's move on.

---

$$ f(x) = x^{\frac{2}{3}} - 7x^{\frac{1}{3}} + 10 $$

$$ x^{\frac{2}{3}} - 7x^{\frac{1}{3}} + 10 = 0 $$

Again, the point of this section on substitution is to force our original
equation to look like an Quadratic Equation, meaning that our first term $a$
must always be _sqaured_ or _to the second power_. In this case, we are nearly
there, it's just that we have two different exponents in the form of
$\dfrac{2}{3}$ and $\dfrac{1}{3}$. But recall simply that
$2 \times \dfrac{1}{3} = \dfrac{2}{3}$, and thusly we can also express
$x^{\frac{2}{3}}$ like so:

$$ x^{\frac{2}{3}} = \left(x^{\frac{1}{3}}\right)^2 $$

So now we can write our expression like so:

$$ \left(x^{\frac{1}{3}}\right)^2 - 7\left(x^{\frac{1}{3}}\right) + 10 = 0 $$

And then we can substitute:

$$ u = x^{\frac{1}{3}} $$

Resulting in our substituted expression:

$$ u^2 - 7u + 10 = 0 $$

This is easily factorable:

$$ (u - 5)(u - 2) = 0 $$

And now solve for $u$:

$$ u - 5 = 0 $$

$$ u = 5 $$

$$ u - 2 = 0 $$

$$ u = 2 $$

And now we can plug this back into our expression to solve for $x$:

$$ u = x^{\frac{1}{3}} $$

$$ x^{\frac{1}{3}} = 5 $$

$$ x^{\frac{1}{3}} = 2 $$

Let's solve for each:

$$ x^{\frac{1}{3}} = 5 $$

Remember that whenever we have a fractional exponent, that this actually
represents a radical. In this case:

$$ x^{\frac{1}{3}} = \sqrt[3]{x^1} $$

Thusly we can write our first expression:

$$ x^{\frac{1}{3}} = 5 $$

As:

$$ \sqrt[3]{x} = 5 $$

And then we can simply take the cube of a cube root to cancel that out. We, of
course, do this on both sides of our equation:

$$ \left(\sqrt[3]{x}\right)^3 = (5)^3 $$

$$ x = 125 $$

Let's now solve for the next point:

$$ x^{\frac{1}{3}} = 2 $$

We could also solve this in another way, if we simply took the cube here:

$$ \left(x^{\frac{1}{3}}\right)^3 = (2)^3$$

Well, $\dfrac{1}{3} \times 3 = \dfrac{3}{3} = 1$. This cancels out as well in
this case, so this logic works as well.

a$ x = 2^3 $$

$$ x = 8 $$

We could plug these in, but we'll simply move on. Again, for this example, our
solution is:

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = 125 \\
x = 8 \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

$$ g(x) = x + \sqrt{x} - 20 $$

$$ x + \sqrt{x} - 20 = 0 $$

Here, the appearance is deceiving, there are no exponents at all! But with a
deeper understanding of exponents, we can see that the above expression can also
be expressed like so:

$$ x^1 + x^{\frac{1}{2}} - 20 = 0 $$

And we can further express the first term $x^1$ as:

$$ x^1 = \left(x^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)^2 $$

Which allows us to write our equation as:

$$ \left(x^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)^2 + \left(x^{\frac{1}{2}}\right) - 20 = 0 $$

And this is now set up for substitution:

$$ u = x^{\frac{1}{2}} $$

Which causes our original equation to now look like:

$$ u^2 + u - 20 = 0 $$

This is factorable like so:

$$ (u + 5)(u - 4) = 0 $$

Let's solve for $u$:

$$ u + 5 = 0 $$

$$ u = -5 $$

$$ u = 4 $$

And then we can solve for $x$:

$$ u = x^{\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ x^{\frac{1}{2}} = -5 $$

$$ x^{\frac{1}{2}} = 4 $$

Similar to the last problem, we have two ways we can solve this as long as we
understand how exponents work. Recall once again that:

$$ x^{\frac{1}{2}} = \sqrt[2]{x^1} $$

Thusly we can write our first solution from:

$$ x^{\frac{1}{2}} = -5 $$

As:

$$ \sqrt{x} = -5 $$

Which we can solve for $x$ by taking both sides to the power of $2$:

$$ \left(\sqrt{x}\right)^2= (-5)^2 $$

$$ x = 25 $$

But wait, a squared number _can't equal a negative number_. So this _isn't a
solution!_.

Let's solve for the next one:

$$ x^{\frac{1}{2}} = 4 $$

$$ \left(x^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)^2 = (4)^2 $$

$$ x = 16 $$

Thusly our solution is:

$$ \boxed{x = 16} $$

This example highlights the fact that we have to be very careful when taking an
even number root and having it equal a negative number! This is fine for odd
powered radicals, just not even numbered radicals, so be very careful, this can
trip up many students.

---

$$ h(y) = -2y^{-2} - 11y^{-1} + 40 $$

Let's set it to $0$ to start:

$$ -2y^{-2} - 11y^{-1} + 40 = 0 $$

Firstly, let's just get this into an easier form, change the negative
coefficent:

$$ 2y^{-2} + 11y^{-1} - 40 = 0 $$

We can still perform substitution on this by simply understanding that:

$$ y^{-2} = \left(y^{-1}\right)^2 $$

Understanding this, we can now rewrite our original equation as:

$$ 2\left(y^{-1}\right)^2 + 11\left(y^{-1}\right) - 40 = 0 $$

Setting up our substitution thusly:

$$ u = y^{-1} $$

Rewriting our equation with our substitution as:

$$ 2u^2 + 11u - 40 = 0 $$

We can factor this as:

$$ (2u - 5)(u + 8) = 0 $$

And then solve for $u$:

$$ 2u - 5 = 0 $$

$$ 2u = 5 $$

$$ u = \frac{5}{2} $$

$$ u + 8 = 0 $$

$$ u = -8 $$

And then we take away our substitution to solve for $y$:

$$ u = y^{-1} $$

$$ y^{-1} = \frac{5}{2} $$

$$ y^{-1} = -8 $$

The expression of $y^{-1}$ can trip us up if we don't understand what this
means. Consider that this expression also means:

$$ y^{-1} = \frac{1}{y} $$

Thusly we can rewrite our two solutions as:

$$ \frac{1}{y} = \frac{5}{2} $$

$$ \frac{1}{y} = -8 $$

We can now solve these through simple algebra.

$$ y\left(\frac{1}{y}\right) = y\left(\frac{5}{2}\right) $$

$$ 1 = \frac{5}{2}y $$

$$ 1\left(\frac{2}{5}\right) = \left(\frac{5}{2}y\right)\left(\frac{2}{5}\right) $$

$$ y = \frac{2}{5} $$

And now the other solution:

$$ \frac{1}{y} = -8 $$

$$ y\left(\frac{1}{y}\right) = y(-8) $$

$$ 1 = -8y $$

$$ y = -\frac{1}{8} $$

And our two solutions are:

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
y = \frac{2}{5} \\
y = -\frac{1}{8}
\end{align*}
}
$$

Notice that this is just giving us the reciprocal of our original expression of
$y^{-1}$.
