# Solving Quadratic Inequalities (Precalculus - College Algebra 25)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qd41nGPHbMU)

---

This will be a relatively quick section. Quadratic Inequalities are very similar
to Quadratic Equations, but in briefly covering this topic, we are preparing you
for covering Rational Inequalities down the line.

With Quadratic Inequalities, what we want to keep in mind is that like Quadratic
Equations, these are graphed as Parabolas. Unlike Quadratic Equations, we are
essentially saying that at some point on our graph where our function is greater
than or equal to a certain value, the Parabola stops.

Let's get started with a few examples.

---

**Examples**

---

$$ x^2 - 3x - 10 \leq 0 $$

This is an upwards opening parabola..._up to where it meets $f(x) = 0$ or more
succinctly, where the it hits the $x$-axis at $0$_.

We will now solve for the $x$-intercepts as usual, but this is more in this
context to determine where it crosses, so we can graph where the graph is above
or below the $x$-axis.

$$ x^2 - 3x - 10 = 0 $$

$$ (x - 5)(x + 2) = 0 $$

$$ x = 5 $$

$$ x = -2 $$

We have not yet solved this problem, we've just determined where the Parabola
crosses the $x$-axis. In order to express this mathematically, we need to use
_Interval Notation_.

In this case, we include $-2$ and $5$ as it is expressed as "less than _or equal
to_". Thusly we can say our graph exists between the following values for $x$:

$$ \boxed{[-2, 5]} $$

---

$$ 2x^2 < 5x + 3 $$

This may not appear as such, because it is not in standard form, but this is
indeed a Quadratic Inequality, and thusly, can be graphed as a Parabola. What it
is essentially saying is this:

> "You have a Parabola represented by $2x^2$, it is graphed as such opening
> upwards, it's a bit skinny. You also have a slope intercept line represented
> by $5x + 3$, please tell me the intervals at which the parabola is above or
> below the line."

Now, we can "cheat" this a bit by setting up a standard form equation and
solving for $x$, which changes the dynamics of what we are evaluating here, but
it amounts to solving for the intervals at which the original statement is
either true or false.

$$ 2x^2 < 5x + 3 $$

$$ 2x^2 - 5x - 3 < 0 $$

From here, we can simply factor:

$$ (2x + 1)(x - 3) = 0 $$

$$ 2x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ 2x = -1 $$

$$ x = -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ x - 3 = 0 $$

$$ x = 3 $$

We can now use _Interval Notation_ to express our answer:

$$ \boxed{\left(-\frac{1}{2}, 3\right)} $$

---

$$ x(x + 1) > 20 $$

This essentially saying, "At what interval is this parabola above the height of
$20$." We can change our expression as before to be in standard form:

$$ x^2 + x - 20 > 0 $$

$$ (x + 5)(x - 4) = 0 $$

a$ x = -5 $$

$$ x = 4 $$

Unlike our other inequalities discussed thus far, this one is true for all
values _outside_ of the confines our Parabola, in other words, this statement is
true for all values from $-\infty$ up to, but not including, $-5$, and also
from, but not including, $4$ up to $\infty$. Thusly we can express our answer in
_Interval Notation_ like so:

$$ (-\infty, -5) \cup (4, \infty) $$

---

$$ 4x^2 + 9 < 6x $$

This is another example of a Parabola ($4x^2 + 9$), and a line ($6x$). We are
looking for where the Parabola is Below The Line.

Let's do as before and set our inequality in standard form:

$$ 4x^2 - 6x + 9 < 0 $$

And solve, this isn't easily factorable so let's use the Quadratic Formula.

$$ x = \frac{-(-6) \pm \sqrt{(-6)^2 - 4(4)(9)}}{2(4)} $$

$$ x = \frac{6 \pm \sqrt{36 - 144}}{8} $$

$$ x = \frac{6 \pm \sqrt{-108}}{8} $$

Hold up, we can see we have no $x$-intercepts as our answer will be
complex...what is going on?

In truth, this means that our Parabola is never below the $x$-axis. There is no
_real number_ interval where this expression is true. Thusly we can express this
as an empty set:

$$ \boxed{\emptyset} $$

Now, if we changed the sign:

$$ 4x^2 + 9 > 6x $$

This would change it to include _all_ real numbers, and our answer would change
to:

$$ (-\infty, \infty) $$
