# Applications of Quadratic Functions (Precalculus - College Algebra 26)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ow_u0qLAOJI)

---

Let's go through three quick examples of how we can use Quadratic Equations in
the real world.

---

Let's talk about Revenue. Revenue is a basic idea that if I have $x$ items, then
$x$ times the Price($P$) of each item will give us how much money we bring in
from total sales, also known as Revenue:

$$ R(x) = x \times P $$

Now let's talk about Price. Let's say we keep selling more and more of these
items and it floods the market. This means that the price of each item continues
to drop. An example of how this could be expressed is:

$$ P = -\frac{1}{3}x + 100 $$

Notice the decreasing slope intercept of $-\dfrac{1}{3}x$ here.

This is essentially saying is that the more items we produce, the lower the
price becomes. We still make money, but we're producing alot of goods that
continue to get cheaper the more we make.

So given are two equations above, we could express our Revenue like so by
substituting for $P$:

$$ R(x) = x\left(-\frac{1}{3}x + 100\right) $$

Let's distribute this and see the form of our function:

$$ R(x) = -\frac{1}{3}x^2 + 100x $$

We can already sketch out this parabola in our head. We have a _downward_
opening parabola that peaks at a _Vertex_. This peak is the maximum revenue we
can make, $R(x)$, at the price of $x$. Essentially this means that the fewer
items we make, the less revenue we'll make. As we produce more and more, the
revenue we generates increases and increases up until we hit a maximum (the
_Vertex_), at which point the amount of items we create starts to degrade the
value of our product and it decreases towards $-\infty$ (we go bankrupt).

So let's say we always want our Revenue to be above $0$ (an obvious goal), or at
least break even (making $\$0$). This would be a situation where we want to find
a specific _Domain_ of our function. In other words, we can express this
mathematically as:

$$ R(x) \geq 0 $$

We can then substitute our formula in for $R(x)$.

$$ -\frac{1}{3}x^2 + 100x \geq 0 $$

We can utilize this inequality to determine between which two prices
(represented by two $x$-intercepts) will our revenue be positive or equal to
$0$.

There are many ways we can solve this inequality. It hardly matters which one we
use as long as we do it properly.

$$ -\frac{1}{3}x^2 + 100x \geq 0 $$

$$ -x\left(\frac{1}{3}x - 100\right) \geq 0 $$

$$ -x\left(\frac{1}{3}x - 100\right) = 0 $$

$$ x = 0 $$

$$ \frac{1}{3}x - 100 = 0 $$

$$ \frac{1}{3}x = 100 $$

$$ x = 300 $$

This indicates that the amount of products we produce should lie between $0$
(can't produce $0$ items, but it's included in this example), and $300$. After
producing more than $300$ products, this indicates that our price $P$ would
become negative (we'd have to pay people to take these products off our
hands...).

We can express our answer as a _Domain_:

$$ \text{D: } [0, 300] $$

So now we can use our formula to determine how much revenue we'd make if we sold
100 items:

$$ R(100) = -\frac{1}{3}(100)^2 + 100(100) $$

Which when evaluated using a calculator yields:

$$ \$6,666.67 $$

What about _Maximum Revenue_? This is where we can find the _Vertex_ of our
Parabola as this indicates our Maximum Height, which in this case is the same
representation of the _Maximum Revenue_. Let's use the Vertex Formula:

$$ \left(-\frac{(b)}{2(a)}, f\left(-\frac{(b)}{2(a)}\right)\right) $$

$$ R(x) = -\frac{1}{3}x^2 + 100x $$

We may not have a $c$, but it doesn't matter, we have an $a$ and a $b$ in our
revenue function, which is all we need to solve this.

$$ \left(-\frac{(100)}{2\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right)}, f\left(-\frac{(100)}{2\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right)}\right)\right) $$

We'll skip over the arithmetic here.

$$ (150, R(150)) $$

$$ R(150) = -\frac{1}{3}(150)^2 + 100(150) $$

Using our calculator we can determine this as:

$$ R(150) = 7500 $$

$$ (150, 7500) $$

So our Maximum Revenue is $\boxed{\$7500}$.

And what is the Price($P$) that we should charge to get our _Maximum Revenue_?

Well, we can take the value of $x$ from our _Maximum Revenue_ evaluation, $150$,
and plug that into our Price Function to determine this:

$$ P = -\frac{1}{3}(150) + 100 $$

$$ P = -50 + 100 $$

$$ P = 50 $$

And thusly we want to charge $\$50$, and we will reach our _Maximum Revenue_ of
$\$7500$ when we sell $150$ products.

---

**Area**

If we have $3000 \text{ft}$ of fencing, and we have unlimited available space to
fence in a garden, find the maximum area available that we can create using this
amount of fencing.

We're going to set up a basic Area formula using two variables, $x$, and $y$. We
also have a _Constraint_, a limiter. We are limited by our Perimeter here,
$3000$. Thusly we have our expression of the perimeter can be written as:

$$ 3000 = 2x + 2y $$

We now need to know a formula of what we need to Maximize, which is our _Area_.
Our standard Area formula reads as:

$$ A = x \times y $$

We can then take our contstraint for the perimeter, solve for either $x$ or $y$,
and then plug that in to our Area formula. Let's just choose and solve for $y$.

$$ 3000 = 2x + 2y $$

$$ 3000 - 2x = 2y $$

$$ \frac{3000 - 2x}{2} = y $$

$$ 1500 - x = y $$

Now we can take this value for $y$ and replace it for $y$ inside of our function
representing what we are trying to maximize, our Area:

$$ A = x \times (1500 - x) $$

$$ A = x(1500 - x) $$

If we then distribute it and write it out in standard form:

$$ A = 1500x - x^2 $$

$$ A = -x^2 + 1500x $$

We now can see if we graphed this we would have a _downward_ opening parabola
that represents our Area. Then we just have to find the maximum to determine the
amount of fencing we'd have to use to maximize our area. This is our _Vertex_:

$$ \left(-\frac{(b)}{2(a)}, f\left(-\frac{(b)}{2(a)}\right)\right) $$

$$ \left(-\frac{(1500)}{2(-1)}, A\left(-\frac{(1500)}{2(-1)}\right)\right) $$

We'll, again, skip over the arithmetic, and find this as:

$$ (750, A(750)) $$

$$ A(750) = -(750)^2 + 1500(750) $$

Using our calculator, we find our answer as:

$$ \boxed{A(750) = 562500 \text{ sq. feet}} $$

---

This last one will be quick. This formula represents the height of the
projectile going at $45\degree$ starting at $2000 \text{ foot/second}$ launch.

$$ h(x) = \frac{-32x^2}{(2000)^2} + x $$

Where $x$ represents the distance from how far away you launched the projectile.
Essentially we're determining how far the projectile goes, it's _Effective
Range_.

We won't be solving this problem, as it can get a bit in the weeds, but this is
another example of where using the lessons of _Quadratic Equations_ comes into
play in real life. It's worth mentioning that the previous two examples are far
more common examples we encounter, but this formula is a point of interest worth
noting nevertheless.
