# Introduction to Polynomial Functions (Precalculus - College Algebra 27)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Uh3Z6DJ_pI)

---

We'll be going into a long dive within this video series now covering Polynomial
Functions. In this section, we'll give a brief review/overview of what
Polynomials and Polynomial Functions are so we are well prepared for the
upcoming lectures.

---

## What Are Polynomials?

Polynomials are expressions in mathematics where we have several terms. "Poly"
meaning many, nomial meaning "name". Polynomials don't necessarily have to have
several terms, they can have just one term, but typically they have multiple
terms that are combined using addition and subtraction.

The following may seem somewhat confusing to look at, but it will give us a
general sense of what a Polynomial expression will look like eventually:

$$ f(x) = a_nx^n + a_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \text{ ... } + a_2x^2 + a_1x + a_0 $$

Notice here that the $a$'s have different subscripts and that these subscripts
match the exponents (_i.e._ $n$, $n-1$). Note also that these are in a specific
_order_. This is not coincidence, we want these terms to be in order for a
number of reasons. This is because the order of the terms will inform us about
the nature of our Polynomial and how it might look when graphed. The _Leading
Term_, the first term of our Polynomial Function, tells us a lot about the
nature of our function. We'll be defining what this means in a bit, but we will
get $n$ "behavior" from our _Leading Term_, we're going to get the "degree",
which gives us $n$ "behavior" from our _Leading Term_. The degree also tells us
the number of $0$'s we have if we include complex numbers.

We also want our _Constant Term_, $a_0$ to be at the end. The reason this is
desirable is if we have a constant, we cannot just factor out $x$, but if we
don't have a constant, you can.

If you do have a constant, we'll definitely want to know what that constant is.
This is because if you can't factor this easily, or use the _Quadratic Formula_,
then we should know that for degree $5$ and higher polynomials, there is no such
thing as a formula to give you $0$'s, it doesn't exist. Up to power $4$, there
is, but it is _particular difficult_.

Thusly we have something called the
[**_Rational Zeroes Theorem_**](https://www.sparknotes.com/math/algebra2/polynomials/section4/)
to find all rational zeroes of a Polynomial Function, as long as we know what
the _Leading Term_ and the _Constant Term_ are.

Let's now define some terminology common to discussions around _Polynomial
Functions_.

---

### Polynomial Functions Terminology

**1. Leading Term:**

$$ a_nx^n $$

If your _Polynomial Function_ is _in order_, then the _Leading Term_ is going to
be the term with the _largest exponent_. This is the only coefficient ($a_n$)
that we don't want to be $0$.

Again, the _Leading Term_ tells us so much about our _Polynomial Function_, it
gives us the _Behavior, it gives us the _Degree_, it gives us the number of
maximum turning points if you subtract $1$ from the _Degree_, it's going to give
us the number of $0$'s if you include complex numbers. And the leading
coefficient, $a_n$ gives us what we need to utilize the _Rational Zeroes
Theorem_.

**2. Constant Term:**

$$ a_0 $$

The _Constant Term_ should be the last term in our _Polynomial Function_. It is
the only term without an $x$. A _Constant Term_ is _not required_ for a function
to be a _Polynomial Function_, but if you do, it should be ordered last in the
expression.

We do not consider the _Constant Term_ to be a coefficient because it is not a
variable term (it does not have an $x$). Unlike variable terms, there should
only be one _Constant Term_. This is because they are always like terms, and if
you have multiple constant terms, you should combine them via standard
arithmetic into a single _Constant Term_.

**3. Degree:**

$$ a_\textbf{n}x^{\textbf{n}} $$

The _Degree_ is the largest exponent that appears in the Polynomial. This should
always appear in the _Leading Term_. The _Degree_ can sometimes be confusing to
find when we start talking about distributing Polynomials in order to solve
specific mathematical problems. For now, just keep in mind that the _Degree_ can
always be found by looking at the _Leading Term_ and determining what it's
exponent is, as long as your Polynomial is in order.

---

### Notes On Polynomial Functions

A few notes here on Polynomials. It is important going forward that we ensure
that when we have a _Polynomial Function_ that all the _Exponents are
Non-Negative Integers_ (_i.e._ $n \geq 0$ and $n$ is _not a fraction_), and that
the function is _Ordered By Descending Exponents_.

Because $n$ can _never be a faction_, this means we have no _Asymptotes_ that
limit the _Domain_ of our _Polynomial Function_, and thusly our _Domain_ is _all
real numbers_ (_i.e._ $(-\infty, \infty)$).

Let's now take a look at a few examples to familiarize ourselves with what is
and is not a _Polynomial Function_.

---

**Examples**

---

$$ f(x) = 5x^2 + 4x^4 $$

The first thing to ask is "Is there anything that makes this _not_ a
Polynomial?" This is mainly because, while we will cover non-polynomials in a
future section, we simply are focusing solely on _Polynomial Functions_ for now.

In finding out whether our Function is a _Polynomial Function_, we will then ask
"Are all exponents _Non-Negative Integers_?" In this case, yes, they are, there
are no negative or fractional exponents. The only issue with this expression is,
this function is not in order. This is indeed a _Polynomial Function_, but let's
just put it in order, this means the exponents need to be _descending_. Don't
worry about the values of the coefficients, all we care about is the order of
the exponents.

$$ f(x) = 4x^4 + 5x^2 $$

Notice here that we have no power of $3$ here. Or, at least, it's not made
visually represented. Technically it does exist, consider the following:

$$ f(x) = 4x^4 + 0x^3 + 5x^2 $$

By giving our power $3$ a $0$ coefficient, we are writing the same polynomial,
it just is expressing a term that would be $0$'d out. We generally don't need to
write this, but in some cases, it might become useful when evaluating
polynomials.

So what is our _Leading Term_?

Well that would be $4x^4$. Notice that the entire _Term_ is referenced here. The
_Leading Coefficient_ is $4$, which is presented before the $x$, the _Degree_ is
$4$, the exponent of $x$.

The next term is $5x^2$, and we do not have a _Constant Term_.

---

$$ g(x) = 3 - \frac{1}{2}x $$

This may throw you off because of the presence of a fraction, but recall, it is
only not a _Polynomial Function_ if it has a fraction _as an exponent_. This is
indeed a _Polynomial Function_, we just need to write it in order:

$$ g(x) = -\frac{1}{2}x + 3 $$

Notice here that we keep our signs, so the negative comes with the
$\dfrac{1}{2}$.

The _Leading Term_ is $-\dfrac{1}{2}x$. The _Constant Term_ is $3$.

Consider that we could write this expression like this to be very clear about
it's nature of being a _Polynomial Function_.

$$ g(x) = -\frac{1}{2}x^1 + 3x^0 $$

Recall from our time in Algebra talking about exponents that any number where
the power is raised to $0$ is like multiplying by $1$ (unless that number is
$0$). In other words $x^0 = 1$. We are saying "multiply $3$ by $1$ here".

---

$$ h(x) = 9 $$

Very confusing at first, but indeed, this is also a _Polynomial Function_, for
the reasons addressed in the previous example. Consider the following again:

$$ h(x) = 9x^0 $$

So now we have a _Leading Term_, which is $9$. We do have a _Constant Term_,
which is $9$, and we have a _Degree_ of $0$.

---

$$ f(x) = 0 $$

This may appear to be the same as the previous example, but has actually has _No
Degree_. Why?

$0$ is an interesting number in that it is a multiplicative construct that if
you multiply it by anything, it gives you back $0$. This means we could put any
exponent to $x$, and no matter what, we will always get back $0$. This means we
cannot determine the _Degree_ as it could be _anything_!

In this case, it is a _Polynomial Function_, but it has _No Degree_.

---

$$ F(x) = x^{\frac{3}{2}} + 2x - 1 $$

Just as an aside here, please note the following:

$$ x^{\frac{3}{2}} = \sqrt{x^3} $$

This is a _radical_ and we cannot have fractional/radical exponents in
_Polynomial Functions_. Thusly this is _Not A Polynomial Function_.

We will address these kinds of expressions in a future section.

---

$$ G(x) = 1 - \frac{4}{x} $$

This is another example of an expression that is _Not A Polynomial_. Why?

Whenever you see variables on the denominator, this is actually an example of a
negative exponent. We could also write this function as:

$$ G(x) = 1 - 4x^{-1} $$

And a _Polynomial Function_ is defined by it not having negative integers as
exponents.

---

$$ f(x) = 9x^4 - \pi x^2 + \frac{1}{2} $$

This may include many different types of numbers here, but none of them break
the rules of being a _Polynomial Function_. This is a _Polynomial Function_.

It is in order. Our _Leading Term_ is $9x^4$, our _Constant Term_ is
$\dfrac{1}{2}$, and our _Degree_ is $4$.

---

We'll now cover further examples that may throw students off.

---

$$ g(x) = \frac{x^2 - 5}{x^4} $$

Is this a Polynomial? No, it's not, but we need to do something before making
that determination. Note that we could also express this function like so:

$$ g(x) = \frac{x^2}{x^4} - \frac{5}{x^4} $$

This may appear to still be fine as a Polynomial, but consider that this further
can be expressed like this:

$$ g(x) = x^{-2} - 5x^{-4} $$

And now you can see, it breaks our rule of not having any negative exponents.

A simple way to tell if a function isn't a polynomial is if it has variable
terms on the denominator.

For your reference, this is instead an example of a _Rational Function_.

---

$$ h(x) = \frac{3x^2 - 1}{7} $$

This is a _Polynomial_. It does have a denominator, but there are no variables
on the denominator. Consider that you could rewrite the above function as:

$$ h(x) = \frac{3}{7}x^2 - \frac{1}{7} $$

Here we can now determine the parts of a standard _Polynomial Function_. Our
_Leading Term_ is $\dfrac{3}{7}x^2$, our _Constant Term_ is $-\dfrac{1}{7}$, and
our _Degree_ is $2$.

---

$$ G(x) = 2\sqrt{x}\left(\sqrt{x} + 1\right) $$

The presence of square roots here indicate that this is _not_ a _Polynomial
Function_. That is correct, but keep in mind that we probably want to distribute
this in the case that the square roots "go away". But be careful. It may appear
that multiplying $2\sqrt{x} \times \sqrt{x} = 2x$, and yes, that's true, but
Polynomials must have non-negative integers as exponents, and whenever you take
the square root of a variable, that means it could be either positive or
negative, $\pm$. Thusly, because this is _potentially_ negative, we know this
cannot be a Polynomial. This function would have a limited _Domain_ due to this,
and we know that the _Domain_ of a _Polynomial_ is _all real numbers_.

This is made further apparent considering we could rewrite our function like so:

$$ G(x) = 2x^{\frac{1}{2}}\left(x^{\frac{1}{2}} + 1\right) $$

And additionally, even if we do distribute, we still get a square root in our
simplified expression:

$$ G(x) = 2\sqrt{x}\left(\sqrt{x} + 1\right) \rightarrow G(x) = 2x + 2\sqrt{x} $$

---

This following example is more about navigating when we find a Polynomial that
is factored and we have to distribute.

$$ F(x) = 2x^3(x^2 - 1)(x - 1)^2 $$

We oftentimes either find ourselves with a Polynomial that is either already
distributed or we have distributed for some reason while solving a mathematical
problem. Keep in mind the original PEMDAS rules when distributing to find our
final Polynomial ordered form. This is necessary, as we mentioned earlier, we
need to know the _Leading Term_ in order to determine much about our _Polynomial
Function_.

Professor Leonard here uses something he calls "Fake Distribution" to determine
the _Leading Term_. Perhaps we will find this useful in the future, but in all
honesty I would just actually distribute this to find our _Leading Term_.
