# Descartes Rule of Signs (Precalculus - College Algebra 33)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-AW6Y1bL4KU)

---

The basic concept behind Descartes Rule Of Signs is if you take a polynomial,
and you count how many sign changes you have from left to right, this will tell
you the number of positive $x$-intercepts you have.

This, on it's own, is not a very useful insight, until you start to combine it
with the _Rational Zeroes Theorem_. Essentially, Descartes Rule of Signs will
tell you, once you have found one zero (_i.e._ one _factor_), how many other
zeroes are left.

When setting up to evaluate a Polynomial using Descartes Rule of Signs, there
are a few order of operations that need to be met:

1. Put the Polynomial _in order_ (based off of exponents).

2. Count the sign changes from left to right.

   - You will have this count of sign changes, or an _even_ number less than
     this count. This is the amount of _positive_ $x$-intercepts.

3. Evaluate for $-x$. Then count the sign changes.

   - You wil have this count of sign changes, or an _even_ number less than this
     count. This is the amount of _negative_ $x$-intercepts.

---

$$ f(x) = -4x^7 + x^3 - x^2 + 2 $$

Counting the sign changes, we see that there are $3$ sign changes (negative to
positive, positive, to negative, negative to positive).

You could potentially have $3$ sign changes, or you keep subtracting $2$ from
this count until you hit either $1$ or $0$. This will give you a list of the
_positive_ $x$-intercepts you could get.

Thusly, in this case, we would either have $3$ or $1$ _positive_ $x$-intercepts.
Again, these are _potential_ _positive_ $x$-intercepts, not necessarily the
actual number of _positive_ $x$-intercepts.

After this, we now evaluate for $-x$.

$$ f(-x) $$

This can get confusing, but a simple operation is to simply change the signs of
your _odd_ powered terms:

$$ f(-x) = 4x^7 - x^3 - x^2 + 2 $$

Now we do the same thing, count the sign changes. There are $2$ sign changes.
This means that we will have either $2$ or $0$ _negative $x$-intercept.s

---

**Why subtract $2$ each time?**

The reason we subtract $2$ each time is because of _irreducable quadratics_. If
a polynomial, or a factor of a polynomial, is not reducable (_i.e._ not
factorable), we get complex numbers. It causes a brief dip in our graph, causing
us to lose $2$ $x$-intercepts each time as it "course corrects".

---

Thinking on this further, this gives us some good information about our
polynomial. One might look at the above example and because the largest power we
have is $7$, we might say "it can have up to 7 zeroes", but based off our
evaluation above, we know that that is not true!

By adding our $3$ total possible _positive_ $x$-intercepts, and our $2$ total
possible _negative_ $x$-intercepts, we know that the maximum number of total
$x$-intercepts is $5$. The other potential $2$ zeroes are not $x$-intercepts
because they are _complex_ numbers!

---

**Examples**

---

$$ g(x) = -x^2 + 2x^3 + 2x - 3 $$

Note here we need to put this in order. If we don't put this in order, the sign
change count will be off. If we count it now, we have $2$ sign changes...

$$ g(x) = 2x^3 - x^2 + 2x - 3 $$

Now we have $3$ sign changes, and this is correct as it is now in order.

This potentially has $3$ or $1$ _positive_ $x$-intercepts.

Now we evaluate for $-x$. Remember, we only change the signs of the _odd_
powered terms.

$$ g(-x) = -2x^3 - x^2 - 2x - 3 $$

Looks like we have $0$ sign changes, and therefore we have **_no_** _negative_
$x$-intercepts. Knowing this will save us a ton of work in the upcoming sections
where we utilize the _Rational Zeroes Theorem_.

---

$$ h(x) = 3x^6 + 82x^3 + 27 $$

This is in order, so we can get started right off the bat with counting sign
changes.

Looks like we have $0$ sign changes, and therefore **_no_** _positive_
$x$-intercepts. Let's now evaluate $h(-x)$. Again, this changes the sign of only
our _odd_ powered terms.

$$ h(-x) = 3x^6 - 82x^3 + 27 $$

And here we have $2$ sign changes. This means we have either $2$ or $0$
_negative_ $x$-intercepts.

---

This concept becomes extremely powerful when combined with factoring, as it
gives us a more detailed overview of potentially how many zeroes we have when
factoring. Even though the Leading Term's Degree tells us how many potential
zeroes we have, Descartes Rule Of Signs tells us the maximum number of zeroes
that are not complex numbers we can have out of a polynomial.
