# How to Use the Rational Zeros Theorem (Precalculus - College Algebra 34)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g7wEpxwgB3w)

---

The
[**_Rational Zeroes Theorem_**](https://www.emathhelp.net/calculators/algebra-1/rational-zeros-theorem-calculator/)
is a powerful theorem that essentially states that if you know your coefficients
from an ordered polynomial, you can come up with a list of all the possible
rational $x$-intercepts for that function.

**Pros**

- This will give you factors without you necessarily knowing how to factor the
  polynomial.

**Cons**

- This can be quite tedious.
- This only give you possible list of all _Rational_ zeroes, it does _not_ give
  you square roots, radical zeroes, or complex zeroes.

Remember, your _goal_ with polynomials is to _Factor_ them so that you can graph
them and get more data on the function.

---

First and foremost, as always, we have an ordered polynomial. Very important:

$$ f(x) = a_nx^n + \text{ ... } + a_0 $$

After this, we find the factors of our constant term, $a_0$. We traditionally
call the factors of our constant term, $P$.

We also find the factors of our leading coefficient, $a_n$. We traditionally
call the factors of our leading coefficient $q$.

We then take a list of all possible permutations of $\dfrac{P}{q}$, and this
gives us a list of all _possible_ _rational_ zeroes.

---

**Examples**

---

$$ f(x) = 2x^3 + 11x^2 - 7x - 6 $$

Let's start slow and proper. Is this in order? Yes.

Let's review a bit, what is the degree? The _Degree_ is $3$.

What about the End Behavior?

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{As } x \rightarrow -\infty, f(x) \rightarrow -\infty \\
\text{and as } x \rightarrow \infty, f(x) \rightarrow \infty  \\
\end{align*}
$$

What about the $y$-intercept?

$$ y\text{-intercept: } (0, -6) $$

An _odd_ degree means that we have to _Cross_ the $x$-intercept at least one
time.

The Degree being $3$ means that we can have _at most_ $3$ $x$-intercepts.

Though not necessary, it can save us a lot of time to apply Descartes Rule of
Signs to it. Let's start by counting the sign changes of our polynomial:

$$ f(x) = 2x^3 + 11x^2 - 7x - 6 $$

There is only $1$ sign change in this polynomial. And thusly we have $1$
possible _positive_ $x$-intercept. What about $f(-x)$?

$$ f(-x) = -2x^3 + 11x^2 + 7x - 6 $$

Again, we only change the sign of the _odd_ powered terms. Here we have $2$ sign
changes, and thusly we have either $2$ or $0$ _negative_ $x$-intercepts.

Now we can start applying the _Rational Zeroes Theorem_. Let's start with our
original function.

$$ f(x) = 2x^3 + 11x^2 - 7x - 6 $$

Let's take a look at all our possible factors for our constant term first, which
is $6$:

$$ -6\text{: } \left\{\pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6\right\} $$

Note here that we could have done this for positive $6$ as the factors for
positive and negative numbers are always the same list. Just keep that in mind.

We then do the same for our leading coefficient, which is $2$:

$$ 2\text{: } \left\{\pm 1, \pm 2 \right\} $$

We now have the list of numbers for both our constant term and our leading
coefficient. This stands is our $P$ and $q$ respectively:

$$ P\text{: } -6 \text{: } \left\{\pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6\right\} $$

$$ q\text{: } 2 \text{: } \left\{\pm 1, \pm 2 \right\} $$

And then divide your list of possible _rational_ zeroes:

$$ \frac{P}{q} \text{ : } \left\{\pm \frac{1}{1}, \pm \frac{2}{1}, \pm \frac{3}{1}, \pm \frac{6}{1}, \pm \frac{1}{2}, \pm \frac{2}{2}, \pm \frac{3}{2}, \pm \frac{6}{2} \right\} $$

Note that because $1$ is always a zero, we will have a repeat of $P$ immediately
as our first set of numbers. Simplified, our list is:

$$ \frac{P}{q} \text{ : } \left\{\pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6, \pm \frac{1}{2}, \pm 1, \pm \frac{3}{2}, \pm 2 \right\} $$

We have some repeated numbers, let's remove them as repetition is unnecessary
here:

$$ \frac{P}{q} \text{ : } \left\{\pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6, \pm \frac{1}{2}, \pm \frac{3}{2} \right\} $$

This is a list of $12$ numbers ($\pm$ doubles the number in the above list).

One might look at this and think "this is a list of all my zeroes". Recall,
however, that our _Degree_ is $3$, which is the most amount we can have. This is
just a list of _potential_ rational zeroes.

Now, this process can get rather tedious, especially as this list grows. This is
why _Descartes Rule of Signs_ is so helpful, as it can potentially eliminate
some work for us as we go through testing each of these potential zeroes.

Now we simply make our way through the list, while keeping Descartes' rule in
mind. We check $1$, then $-1$, $2$, then $-2$, $3$, then $-3$, and we don't have
to check $4$ as it's not on our list, we simply jump to $6$ and so on. If
plugging in one of these numbers evaluates to $0$, then you have an
$x$-intercept, and it creates a _factor_, a zero.

Note that our zeroes are typically whole numbers, so it's advisable to start
with whole numbers first.

Let's try this out by evaluating $f(1)$:

$$ f(1) = 2(1)^3 + 11(1)^2 - 7(1) - 6 $$

$$ f(1) = 2 + 11 - 7 - 6 $$

$$ f(1) = 13 - 13 $$

$$ f(1) = 0 $$

And right off the bat, $1$ is one of our rational zeros, an $x$-intercept, a
factor.

Once you find a factor, _STOP_! factor this out of your original equation using
synthetic division or some other method and see if you can more easily factor
your polynomial from here. Doing this over and over again is too time consuming,
and usually once you factor out one of these using the Rational Zeroes Theorem,
you can factor using some other means more easily.

Additionally, recall that thanks to our discovery using Descartes Rule of Signs,
that we know we can only have $1$ _positive_ $x$-intercept! This means that
whatever we do, we don't have check _positive_ factors anymore! This is why
Descartes Rule of Signs is so important, it essentially _halved_ the remaining
work we have.

Because we now know that $x - 1 = 0$, that $x = 1$ is a factor, we can use
synthetic division to solve for our new polynomial.

| $r$ | $x^3$ | $x^2$ | $x$ | $R$ |
| --- | ----- | ----- | --- | --- |
| 1   | 2     | 11    | -7  | -6  |
|     |       | 2     | 13  | 6   |
|     | 2     | 13    | 6   | 0   |

If this is indeed an $x$-intercept, then $R$ will always be $0$.

This now leaves us with the following polynomial:

$$ f(x) = (x + 1)(2x^2 + 13x + 6) $$

We are not done. We need to factor this completely. We have to now either factor
this into linear quadratics or irreducable quadratics.

You can now either factor, or you can continue to use the Rational Zeroes list
we produced earlier to further factor this polynomial. We _would_ continue to
factor out starting all over again with $1$, BUT, thanks to Descartes Rule of
Signs, we've ruled another $x + 1$ as a potential zero. In fact, we wouldn't
test any positive factors from here on out, only negatives.

Again, if Descartes Rule of Signs hadn't done this, we would indeed check $1$
again because we wouldn't know if we had multiple repeated roots or not.

But what's the right choice? Generally speaking, Factoring if you can, list if
you can't, or you can use the Quadratic Formula. Let's try to factor this:

$$ f(x) = (x + 1)(2x + 1)(x + 6) $$

If we then solve for our zeroes:

$$ x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ x = -1 $$

$$ 2x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ 2x = -1 $$

$$ x = -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ x + 6 = 0 $$

$$ x = -6 $$

And these are our $x$-intercepts:

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = -1 \\
x = -\frac{1}{2} \\
x = -6 \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

---

$$ h(x) = 3x^3 + 6x^2 - 15x - 30 $$

All is in order, good stuff. Degree $3$ describes the behavior of the graph, it
is positive, so we know the ending behavior is:

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{As } x \rightarrow -\infty, f(x) \rightarrow -\infty \\
\text{and as } x \rightarrow \infty, f(x) \rightarrow \infty  \\
\end{align*}
$$

Using _Descartes Rule of Signs_, we can determine that this has $1$ sign change,
and has exactly $1$ _positive_ $x$-intercept. If we evaluate for $h(-x)$, we
get:

$$ h(-x) = -3x^3 + 6x^2 + 15x - 30 $$

We have $2$ sign changes, and we have either $2$ or $0$ _negative_
$x$-intercepts.

Now, this example really is a good example of why we should probably factor
prior to starting this whole process. Notice that we can factor out a $3$ from
our entire function:

$$ h(x) = 3x^3 + 6x^2 - 15x - 30 \rightarrow 3(x^3 + 2x^2 - 5x - 10) $$

Now, this will actually give us the same Rational Zeroes List as our original
function, but it is easier to reason about, so always factor your original
function if you can.

We can also further factor by grouping:

$$ h(x) = 3(x^3 + 2x^2 - 5x - 10) \rightarrow h(x) = 3\left(x^2(x + 2) - 5(x + 2)\right) \rightarrow h(x) = 3(x + 2)(x^2 - 5) $$

$$ h(x) = 3(x + 2)(x^2 - 5) $$

Now, is this completely factored? No. Is $x^2 - 5$ an irreducable quadratic?
Also no! This is factorable, but the thought process may not be straight
forward. Consider the following:

$$ h(x) = 3(x + 2)(x - \sqrt{5})(x + \sqrt{5}) $$

And since these are all linear quadratics, and this is fully factored. We can
now determine our $x$-intercepts using the zero product property:

$$ x + 2 = 0 $$

$$ x = -2 $$

$$ x - \sqrt{5} = 0 $$

$$ x = \sqrt{5} $$

$$ x + \sqrt{5} = 0 $$

$$ x = -\sqrt{5} $$

$$
\boxed{
\begin{align*}
x = -2 \\
x = \sqrt{5} \\
x = -\sqrt{5} \\
\end{align*}
}
$$

Let's consider what would have happened had we used the _Rational Zeros Theorem_
to factor this. We would have developed our list by finding all the factors of
our constant (after we had factored out $3$):

$$ P \text{ : } \left\{\pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 5, \pm 10 \right\} $$

And also our leading coefficient:

$$ q \text{ : } \left\{1\right\} $$

We would have then eventually found $-2$ to be a factor and used synthetic
division to find our further factored form. This would have yielded:

$$ (x + 2)(x^2 - 5) $$

But we would not have found $\sqrt{5}$ in our list because the Rational Zeroes
Theorem only gives us whole numbers or fractions, not square roots. This is why
knowing how to use other methods like the Quadratic Formula is so essential when
we get do finally find a factor that is a Quadratic.

---

$$ g(x) = x^5 - 7x^4 + 19x^3 - 37x^2 + 60x - 36 $$

This is a very long example and will take a while to solve. Notice that this is
a degree $5$, as mentioned in previous sections, this is not easily factorable
by any formula or single mathematical formula. We have to use the many different
methods we have learned thus far to find all the zeroes of this function.

Is it in order? Yes.

The degree $5$ is an _odd_ powered function. That means that the Ending behavior
is:

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{As } x \rightarrow -\infty, f(x) \rightarrow -\infty \\
\text{and as } x \rightarrow \infty, f(x) \rightarrow \infty  \\
\end{align*}
$$

And we are going to cross the $x$-axis at least once.

The $5$ degree means we will have _at most_ $5$ $x$-intercepts.

Can we factor anything out of this? Well there is no GCF, nor is there an $x$
nor a number we can factor out. Can we use grouping? Can I use Quadratic
Formula? No, no, and no. We cannot factor this as is.

So we'll have to use the _Rational Zeroes Theorem_ to find our list of numbers
that represent potential zeroes. But first let's ensure we don't do extra work
by first evaluating how many positive and negative potential $x$-intercepts we
could have by using _Descartes Rule of Signs_.

Again, our original function is:

$$ g(x) = x^5 - 7x^4 + 19x^3 - 37x^2 + 60x - 36 $$

The number of sign changes is $5$. This means that we could have $5$, $3$, or
$1$ _positive_ $x$-intercepts.

Now, let's evaluate $g(-1)$ to count our potential _negative_ $x$-intercepts.

$$ g(-x) = -x^5 - 7x^4 - 19x^3 - 37x^2 - 60x - 36 $$

We have $0$ sign changes, meaning we have $0$ potential _negative_
$x$-intercepts. This just cut our work in half.

Now, let's evaluate our constant to find $P$:

$$ P \text{ : } \left\{1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 12, 18, 36\right\} $$

Notice here that we don't have any $\pm$ here, as thanks to _Descartes Rule of
Signs_ evaluation, we determined that we will have $0$ _negative_
$x$-intercepts.

Now, let's evaluate our leading coefficient to find $q$.

$$ q \text{ : } \left\{1\right\} $$

And that means that our evaluation of our _Rational Zeros List_ is just $P$
again, as $\dfrac{P}{q}$ is the same as $P$ when $q$ is $1$.

$$ \frac{P}{q} \text{ : } \left\{1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 12, 18, 36\right\} $$

Now, we know that not all of these will work (our degree of $5$ tells us we can
have at most $5$ zeroes). Let's start by simply plugging in $1$ and seeing if
that evaluates to $0$:

$$ g(1) = (1)^5 - 7(1)^4 + 19(1)^3 - 37(1)^2 + 60(1) - 36 $$

$$ g(1) = 1 - 7 + 19 - 37 + 60 - 36 $$

$$ g(1) = 0 $$

So $x = 1$ is an $x$-intercept, and $x - 1$ is a factor. We can then use
synthetic division to find our remaining polynomial:

| $r$ | $x^5$ | $x^4$ | $x^3$ | $x^2$ | $x$ | $R$ |
| --- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | --- | --- |
| 1   | 1     | -7    | 19    | -37   | 60  | -36 |
|     |       | 1     | -6    | 13    | -24 | 36  |
|     | 1     | -6    | 13    | -24   | 36  | 0   |

Again, our $R$ should be $0$ if we have done our work correctly thus far. This
leaves us with:

$$ g(x) (x - 1)(x^4 - 6x^3 + 13x^2 - 24x + 36) $$

Since this remaining polynomial is not easily factorable through grouping,
factoring, quadratic formula. Thusly, we can continue to use our Rational Zeros
List to evaluate. We will repeat using $1$ as we could have repeated zeroes. If
that doesn't work, we just continue down the list, $2$, $3$, etc.

For the reasons of expediency, we'll not do that here, and we'll give you the
answer for this next one and say that the next zero is $x = 3$ or $x - 3 = 0$ is
a factor. Let's do synthetic division again with this:

| $r$ | $x^4$ | $x^3$ | $x^2$ | $x$ | $R$ |
| --- | ----- | ----- | ----- | --- | --- |
| 3   | 1     | -6    | 13    | -24 | 36  |
|     |       | 3     | -9    | 12  | -36 |
|     | 1     | -3    | 4     | -12 | 0   |

We are now left with:

$$ g(x) = (x - 1)(x - 3)(x^3 - 3x^2 + 4x - 12) $$

Now, again, we can continue down our list, but anytime we arrive at a new form
like this we want to ask if we can factor using any other way. If we didn't, we
would start by factoring out $3$ again. Why $3$? Well we tried $1$ and $2$ twice
and it no longer worked. Every time we factor out a new form, we start at the
previous factor we landed on.

In this case, however, we can actually factor further by using grouping:

$$ g(x) = (x - 1)(x - 3)(x^2(x - 3) + 4(x - 3)) $$

$$ g(x) = (x - 1)(x - 3)(x^2 + 4)(x - 3) $$

This further evaluates to:

$$ \boxed{g(x) = (x - 1)(x - 3)^2(x^2 + 4)} $$

And we cannot further factor this, as $x^2 + 4$ is an irreducable quadratic, it
gives a complex solution.

---

$$ f(x) = 2x^5 - x^4 + 48x^3 - 24x^2 - 50x + 25 $$

We can see that this is in order, and we cannot easily factor out, group, etc.

Let's use _Descartes Rule of Signs_ to determine potential _positive_
$x$-intercepts. We can see that we have $4$ sign changes and thusly have $4$ or
$2$ or $0$ potential _positive_ $x$-intercepts.

Let's determine our potentital _negative_ $x$-intercepts by counting the signs
of $f(-x)$.

$$ f(-x) = -2x^5 - x^4 - 48x^3 - 24x^2 + 50x + 25 $$

Here we have $1$ sign change, and thusly are guaranteed to have $1$ _negative_
$x$-intercept.

Let's look at our constant term, and find all factors of it to find our list of
$P$.

$$ P \text{ : } \left\{\pm 1, \pm 5, \pm 25\right\} $$

And let's look at our leading coefficient, and find all factors of it to find
our list of $q$.

$$ q \text{ : } \left\{\pm 1, \pm 2\right\} $$

And then to find our Rational Zeros List, we list out all iterations of
$\dfrac{P}{q}$.

$$ \frac{P}{q} \text{ : } \left\{\pm 1, \pm 5, \pm 25, \pm \frac{1}{2}, \pm \frac{5}{2}, \pm \frac{25}{2} \right\} $$

We then start, as always, by checking $1$:

$$ f(1) = 0 $$

And this means:

$$
\begin{align*}
x = 1 \text{ is an }x\text{-intercept} \\
x - 1 \text{ is a factor of } f(x) \\
\end{align*}
$$

We now use synthetic (or long) division to factor out our remaining polynomial:

| $r$ | $x^5$ | $x^4$ | $x^3$ | $x^2$ | $x$ | $R$ |
| --- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | --- | --- |
| 1   | 2     | -1    | 48    | -24   | -50 | 25  |
|     |       | 2     | 1     | 49    | 25  | -25 |
|     | 2     | 1     | 49    | 25    | -25 | 0   |

$$ f(x) = (x - 1)(2x^4 + x^3 + 49x^2 + 25x - 25) $$

This is not easily factorable in this form, so we start back in with our list.
Should we use $1$ again? Yes. Plugging in $1$ into our new polynomial, we find
that it does not equal $0$. From here on out, we don't ever have to try $1$
again. Should we try $-1$? Yes.

$$ f(-1) = 0 $$

This means:

$$
\begin{align*}
x = -1 \text{ is an }x\text{-intercept} \\
x + 1 \text{ is a factor of } f(x) \\
\end{align*}
$$

We can now use further synthetic division to factor further:

$$ f(x) = (x - 1)(2x^4 + x^3 + 49x^2 + 25x - 25) $$

| $r$ | $x^4$ | $x^3$ | $x^2$ | $x$ | $R$ |
| --- | ----- | ----- | ----- | --- | --- |
| -1  | 2     | 1     | 49    | 25  | -25 |
|     |       | -2    | 1     | -50 | 25  |
|     | 2     | -1    | 50    | -25 | 0   |

This now gives us another factor and:

$$ f(x) = (x - 1)(x + 1)(2x^3 - x^2 + 50x - 25) $$

Recall that from our using of _Descartes Rule of Signs_, we determined that we
have only $1$ _negative_ $x$-intercept, which we have just found $x = -1$.
Thusly we do _NOT_ have to try any further negative numbers from our Rational
Zeros List.

That said, we should attempt to factor this. Perhaps by grouping? Yes.

$$ f(x) = (x - 1)(x + 1)\left(x^2(2x - 1) + 25(2x - 1)\right) $$

$$ f(x) = (x - 1)(x + 1)(2x - 1)(x^2 + 25) $$

We can see that $x^2 + 25$ is a complex solution and not further able to be
factored.
