# Introduction to Complex Solutions of Polynomials (Precalculus - College algebra 35)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g-69B5jkcO4)

---

Every Polynomial can be factored into linear and irreducible quadratic factors
over the _real_ number system. Linears give you $x$-intercepts that either cross
or bounce off the $x$-axis. Irreducible Quadratic Factors do _not_ yield
$x$-intercepts, because they give _Complex Solutions_.

If we _allow_ _Complex Solutions_, then we can continue factoring. If you have a
Polynomial, you could factor that into all linear factors if you allow _Complex
Solutions_.

Recall that the Leading Term gives us the Degree of our Polynomial, which as we
mentioned before tells us the _potential_ amount of factors. In the case where
we allow _Complex Solutions_, this tells us the _total_ amount of factors for
that Polynomial, not just the amount of _potential_ factors.

---

**Conjugates**

A Conjugate is essentially two terms with a different sign in the middle. The
first term does not change it's sign, but the second sign does.

A Conjugate of $a + b$ is $a - b$.

A Conjugate of $a + bi$ is $a - bi$.

All Complex Solutions come in Conjugate Pairs:

$$ 2 - 3i \rightarrow 2 + 3i $$

$$ -7 + 5i \rightarrow -7 - 5i $$

Notice that we only change the sign of the imaginary part of the expression.

These Conjugates come from Irreducible Quadratic Expressions.

Consider the standard quadratic expression:

$$ ax^2 + bx + c = 0 $$

And the _Quadratic Formula_:

$$ x = \frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a} $$

This formula gives us a simple clue as to when a Factor is an Irreducible
Quadratic, and that is when the _discriminant_, $b^2 - 4ac$ is negative, which,
when taken from the square root, returns to us an imaginary number $i$, and
thusly creates a _Complex Number_ solution. This is where this ordering of
Conjugates comes from, the imaginary part of the returned values of an
Irreducible Quadratic always comes in pairs of both positive and negative
expressions of the imaginary half of the factors.

---

Understanding this, we can make some assumptions even when just given the Degree
of a Polynomial.

Consider a Degree 6 Polynomial that has the following zeros:

$$ \left\{2, 2 + i, -3 - i, 0\right\} $$

We have some factors that aren't here though, because it's a Degree 6
Polynomial, and we only have 4 factors. We are missing the Conjugates of our two
complex factors. Let's fill them in.

$$ \left\{2, 2 + i, 2 - i, -3 + i, -3 - i, 0\right\} $$

Let's consider another example:

Consider a Degree 7 Polynomial that has the following zeros:

$$ \left\{i, 3 - 2i, -4, -2 + i\right\} $$

Again, a Degree 7 Polynomial is going to have 7 zeros, 7 solutions _if_ we allow
_Complex Solutions_. It will have a maximum of 7 zeros if we only allow _Real
Numbers_. Every Complex Solution has to have a Conjugate pair, which is missing
from our list of zeros, let's fill that in.

$$ \left\{i, 3 - 2i, 3 + 2i, -4, -2 + i, -2 - i\right\} $$

But we still don't have all 7 zeros, see the solitary $i$? That is actually $0 +
i$, so we would also need $0 - i$, thusly the total list of our zeros would be:

$$ \left\{i, -i, 3 - 2i, 3 + 2i, -4, -2 + i, -2 - i\right\} $$
