# Creating Polynomials from Complex Solutions (Precalculus - College Algebra 36)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lIFeZLHVWmc)

---

Recall from our previous introduction to Complex Solutions that if you have one
complex solution, Complex Solutions always come in Conjugate Pairs, meaning you
have a second Complex Solution immediately inferred by the presence of one, just
with the sign changed prior to the imaginary part of the Complex Solution.

In this section, we are going to create Polynomial Functions from Complex
Solutions very much like how we did in a previous section where we created
Polynomials from Real Solutions.

---

Consider if you have a Degree 4 Polynomial with the following zeros:

$$ \left\{3 + 2i, 4 \right\} $$

And the $4$ has a _Multiplicity_ of $2$.

From these statements, we can build the factors of our Polynomial.

We know that we have a complex conjugate of $3 + 2i$.

$$ \left\{3 + 2i, 3 - 2i, 4\right\} $$

Now, before we start writing out factors, we want to be careful, and actually
list out all our solutions so that we don't have any sign errors:

$$ x = 3 + 2i $$

$$ x = 3 - 2i $$

$$ x = 4 $$

We also can simplify the process by not just distributing all of our factors
right off the bat.

Let's start off with the real solution:

$$ x = 4 $$

$$ x - 4 = 0 $$

Now let's start to build our Polynomial:

$$ f(x) = (x - 4) $$

Recall that we have a _Multiplicity_ of $2$ for $x = 4$. So therefore our
Polynomial would, at this point be:

$$ f(x) = (x - 4)(x - 4) $$

Or:

$$ f(x) = (x - 4)^2 $$

We also want to add the coefficient $a$ here, as we don't know if we have this
yet and we want to account for it and solve for it later.

$$ f(x) = a(x - 4)^2 $$

Let's now solve for our Complex Zeros:

$$ x = 3 + 2i $$

$$ x - 3 - 2i = 0 $$

We will now approach this a little differently than in the past when dealing
with factors. We are going to take this Complex factor and group some terms away
from the imaginary part like so:

$$ (x - 3) - 2i = 0 $$

We are doing this because the conjugate will have the same leading grouping of
$(x - 3)$. We also can reason about how to further group these later on in
constructing our Polynomial. Let's solve the next complex factor:

$$ x = 3 - 2i $$

$$ x - 3 + 2i = 0 $$

And group as before:

$$ (x - 3) + 2i = 0 $$

Now let's combine it into our Polynomial thus far:

$$ f(x) = a(x - 4)^2\left[(x - 3) - 2i\right]\left[(x - 3) + 2i\right] $$

Now we distribute. We can either do Maximum Distribution or Minimum
Distribution. Either way, we cannot leave our solution as is above.

The trick is to start with the complex factors:

$$ f(x) = a(x - 4)^2(x - 3)^2 $$

Notice now that the distribution would have $2i(x - 3) - 2i(x - 3)$ which
cancels these two out.

$$ f(x) = a(x - 4)^2(x - 3)^2 - 4i^2 $$

Then we simply multiply $-2i \times 2i$ which equals $-4i^2$ which equals
$-4(-1)$ which is $4$.

$$ f(x) = a(x - 4)^2\left[(x - 3)^2 + 4\right] $$

Which, when expanded out yields us:

$$ f(x) = a(x - 4)^2\left[(x - 3)(x - 3) + 4\right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - 4)^2\left[(x^2 - 6x + 9) + 4\right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - 4)^2(x^2 - 6x + 13) $$

Now, this is the Minimum Distribution. For Maximum Distribution, we would go
further:

$$ f(x) = a(x - 4)(x - 4)(x^2 - 6x + 13) $$

$$ f(x) = a(x^2 - 8x + 16)(x^2 - 6x + 13) $$

And from here we would distribute three terms, which is cumbersome. We'll just
skip to the end here:

$$ f(x) = a(x^4 - 14x^3 + 77x^2 - 200x + 208) $$

Don't distribute the $a$. If you're not given another point, you are done.
However, if you _are_ given another point (that isn't on the $x$-axis). If you
are, you'd set $x$ to the point's $x$, and $f(x)$ to the $y$, and solve for $a$.

---

Consider if we have a Degree 4 Polynomial with the following zeros:

$$ \left\{i, 1 + 2i\right\} $$

We have conjugate pairs for all complex solutions, thusly:

$$ \left\{i, -i, 1 + 2i, 1 - 2i\right\} $$

We now have all our zeros. Let's write out our factors appropriately:

$$ x = i $$

$$ x = -i $$

$$ x = 1 + 2i $$

$$ x = 1 - 2i $$

Let's now set them all to $0$ and see our factors:

$$ x = i $$

$$ x - i = 0 $$

$$ x = -i $$

$$ x + i = 0 $$

$$ x = 1 + 2i $$

$$ x - 1 - 2i = 0 $$

$$ x = 1 - 2i $$

$$ x - (1 - 2i) = 0 $$

$$ x - 1 + 2i = 0 $$

We then group for our latter two complex factors:

$$ (x - 1) - 2i = 0 $$

$$ (x - 1) + 2i = 0 $$

Now let's write out our factored polynomial:

$$ f(x) = a(x - i)(x + i)\left[(x - 1) - 2i\right]\left[(x - 1) + 2i\right] $$

We then distribute:

$$ f(x) = a(x - i)(x + i)\left[(x - 1)^2 - 4i^2\right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - i)(x + i)\left[(x - 1)^2 + 4\right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - i)(x + i)\left[(x - 1)(x - 1) + 4\right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - i)(x + i)\left[(x^2 - 2x + 1) + 4\right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - i)(x + i)(x^2 - 2x + 5) $$

$$ f(x) = a(x^2 - i^2)(x^2 - 2x + 5) $$

$$ f(x) = a(x^2 - (-1))(x^2 - 2x + 5) $$

$$ \boxed{f(x) = a(x^2 + 1)(x^2 - 2x + 5)} $$

---

Consider if we had a Degree 5 Polynomial with the following zeros:

$$ \left\{1, 1 + i\right\} $$

Where $1$ has a _Multiplicity_ of 3.

Well our Conjugate for our complex solution would leave us with the following
set:

$$ \left\{1, 1 + i, 1 - i\right\} $$

And with a _Multiplicity_ of $3$ for our real solution, $1$, we would have the
total amount of Degrees, 5. Let's set out our factors:

$$ x = 1 $$

$$ x = 1 + i $$

$$ x = 1 - i $$

And now let's find the factors by setting them to $0$:

$$ x = 1 $$

$$ x - 1 = 0 $$

$$ x = 1 + i $$

$$ x - (1 + i) = 0 $$

$$ x - 1 - i = 0 $$

$$ x - (1 - i) = 0 $$

$$ x - 1 + i = 0 $$

And then we group our complex solutions:

$$ (x - 1) - i = 0 $$

$$ (x - 1) + i = 0 $$

Now let's start building our polynomial:

$$ f(x) = a(x - 1)^3\left[(x - 1) - i\right]\left[(x - 1) + i\right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - 1)^3\left[(x - 1)^2 - i^2\right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - 1)^3\left[(x - 1)^2 - (-1)\right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - 1)^3\left[(x - 1)^2 + 1 \right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - 1)^3\left[(x - 1)(x - 1) + 1 \right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - 1)^3\left[(x^2 - 2x + 1) + 1 \right] $$

$$ f(x) = a(x - 1)^3(x^2 - 2x + 2) $$

Distributing further from here can get quite tedious. Some instructors might ask
you to do this, so just be careful with signs and combining like terms if you
are asked to do so.
