# Finding a Horizontal Asymptote of a Rational Function (Precalculus - College Algebra 40)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D-H9N-_Y77Y)

---

This lecture is relatively short and covers basically how to determine if a
_Rational Function_ has a _Horizontal Asymptote_.

Recall that a _Rational Function_ is simply one polynomial divided by another
polynomial. We will first be looking at both the numerator and the denominator's
_Leading Terms_ and look at their _Degree_ (ther exponent/power).

A _Horizontal Asymptote_ exists if the degree of the denominator is _greater
than or equal to_ the degree of the numerator at the leading coefficient of the
denominator's _Leading Term_.

- If the Degree Of The Denominator is _greater than_ the Degree Of The
  Numerator, you will have a _Horizontal Asymptote_ at $y = 0$.

- If the Degree Of The Denominator is _equal to_ the Degree Of The Numerator,
  you will have a _Horizontal Asymptote_ at
  $y = \text{The Fraction Of The Leading Coefficients}$.

---

**Notes:**

1. Unlike a _Vertical Asymptote_, you _Can Cross_ a _Horizontal Asymptote_.

2. End Behavior is always determined by _Leading Terms_.

---

**Examples**

---

$$ f(x) = \frac{4x^3 - 7x + 1}{7x^5 + 2x^3 - 3} $$

Let's try to determine our End Behavior first. Recall that End Behavior is
always determined by _Leading Terms_. This means that the End Behavior of this
function $f(x)$ can be expressed like so:

$$ f(x) \approx \frac{4x^3}{7x^5} $$

Now also recall that in this case, the degree of the denominator is _greater
than_ the degree of the numerator ($5 > 3$), this means that we are going to
have a _Horizontal Asymptote_ at $y = 0$.

If we now take our approximation of our End Behavior above, and simplify it by
subtracting our exponents (which we can do due to how exponents of the same base
when divided), we get:

$$ f(x) \approx \frac{4x^3}{7x^5} \rightarrow f(x) \approx \frac{4}{7x^2} $$

We've seen functions like this in previous lectures, we can already roughly
understand the way this function will look as it approaches $y = 0$. The value
for $f(x)$ will continue to get _smaller_ as the value for $x$ gets larger. We
also know that because this function's denominator exponent is _Even_ that the
shape of our graph will be two curved lines symmetrically mirrored along the
$y$-axis.

This can be expressed like so:

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{As } x \rightarrow \infty\text{ , } f(x) \rightarrow 0 \\
\text{and as } x \rightarrow -\infty\text{ , } f(x) \rightarrow 0
\end{align*}
$$

As $x$ approaches $\infty$, $f(x)$ approaches $0$, and as $x$ approaches
$-\infty$, $f(x)$ approaches $0$.

---

$$ g(x) = \frac{8x^3 - 2x + 3}{2x^3 + x^2 - 7x + 5} $$

Here we simply are determining if there are any _Horizontal Asymptotes_ and
where they occur. First thing we want to ask is:

> "Is The Degree of the Denominator's Leading Term Greater Than Or Equal to the
> Degree of the Numerator's Leading Term?"

We can see that $2x^3$ (the leading term of the denominator) and $8x^3$ (the
leading term of the numerator) both have the degree of $3$, meaning that the
degrees are equal. Thusly, we have determined that indeed that this function
will have a _Horizontal Asymptote_ when graphed, and also, because their degrees
are _equal_, that the horizontal asymptote will occur where $y$ equals _The
Fraction Of The Leading Coefficients_.

Let's now approximate our End Behavior:

$$ g(x) \approx \frac{8x^3}{2x^3} \rightarrow g(x) \approx \frac{8}{2} \rightarrow g(x) \approx 4 $$

This means that we will have a _Horizontal Asymptote_ at $y = \dfrac{8}{2} = 4$.
