# Finding Domain of Composite Functions (Precalculus - College Algebra 49)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G8r9oL-ke9s)

---

Now that we have reviewed what Composite Function is, we're going to cover how
to find the _Domain_ of a Composite Function. When two functions are composed
into a single composite function, it is common that sometimes the Domain of this
new composite function will have lost certain intervals of our original two
functions, and the ability to find this new _Domain_ will be essential as we
move forwards into exponential and logarithmic functions, as well as the overall
subject of Calculus.

---

Let's look at a simple example.

If we have our two functions from the previous section, $f(x)$ and $g(x)$, and
we ask to find the domain of the composite function:

$$ (f \circ g)(x) $$

We can go about this by taking the _Domain_ of the "Inside" Function, and adding
it to the Domain of the Simplified Composition.

---

You might recall our examples from the previous section:

$$ f(x) = 2x^2 - 5 $$

$$ g(x) = 1 - 3x^2 $$

And the simplified form of two composite functions from that section:

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = 2(1 - 3x^2)^2 - 5 $$

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = 18x^4 - 12x^2 - 3 $$

$$ (g \circ f)(x) = 1 - 3(2x^2 - 5)^2 $$

$$ (g \circ f)(x) = -12x^4 + 60x^2 - 74 $$

Let's first use the simplified form of the first example:

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = 18x^4 - 12x^2 - 3 $$

We'll first take the "Inside Function" $g(x)$ and find the _Domain_ of $g(x)$.

$$ g(x) = 1 - 3x^2 $$

Again, when looking for the _Domain_, we're looking for the presence of _Square
Roots_, _Denominators_ with variables in them, or _Logarithms_. In the absence
of these three things, this indicates that the _Domain_ includes _All Real
Numbers_.

$$ \text{Domain of } g(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \text{ is all Real Numbers }\right\} $$

Or in interval notation:

$$ (-\infty, \infty) $$

Okay, so first step is done, now we just have to find the _Domain_ of our
composite function after it is simplified:

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = 18x^4 - 12x^2 - 3 $$

Given that again, we have no Square Roots, no Denominators with variables in
them, nor any Logarithms, the same applies here in that the Domain includes _All
Real Numbers_.

$$ \text{Domain of } (f \circ g)(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \text{ is all Real Numbers }\right\} $$

The same would be true of our second example as well, so we won't bother writing
that out.

But this example is rather simple, let's do some more complicated examples to
demonstrate finding the domain where it isn't all real numbers.

---

Consider the following two functions:

$$ f(x) = \frac{x}{x + 3} $$

$$ g(x) = \frac{2}{x} $$

Before we proceed further, let's just find the _Domain_ of each of these
functions, as it will make determining the _Domain_ of any further compositions
with these functions easier.

First for $f(x)$, well we don't have any square roots, nor logarithms, but we do
have a denominator with a variable in it, so we want to consider that basically
$x$ cannot equal $-3$, as that would lead to a denominator with $0$. Thusly our
function contains all real numbers except for $-3$.

$$ \text{Domain for } f(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \neq -3 \right\} $$

And similarly for $g(x)$ we have a denominator with a variable in it, and in
this case, $x$ cannot equal $0$.

$$ \text{Domain for } g(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \neq 0 \right\} $$

And the composition:

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = \frac{\left(\dfrac{2}{x}\right)}{\left(\dfrac{2}{x}\right) + 3} $$

Now, before we proceed, it's important to note that the domain of the "inside
function", in this case the inside function is $g(x)$, will _always_ carry over
to the _Domain_ of the Composite Function. Domain's can never "lose" intervals
or specific numbers that cannot be included in the set, it always carries over
into any function that it is used as an "inside function" of a Coposite
Function.

Let's now simplify our composite function.

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = \frac{\left(\dfrac{2}{x}\right)}{\left(\dfrac{2}{x}\right) + 3} $$

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = \frac{\dfrac{2}{x}}{\dfrac{2}{x} + 3} \cdot \frac{x}{x} $$

Notice that we have multiplied by $1$ _As Long As $x$ Is NOT $0$_. We have
already restricted the _Domain_ of this Composite Function, and that is because
multiplying by the LCD here is the same as multiplying by the denominator of our
original inside function over itself. To be sure we remember this, we write down
our Domain thus far:

$$ \text{Domain of } (f \circ g)(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \neq 0 \right\} $$

And now let's further simplify.

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = \frac{\dfrac{2}{x}}{\dfrac{2}{x} + 3} \cdot \frac{x}{x} $$

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = \frac{2}{3x + 2} $$

This is the simplified form of our composite function, now we can further
restrict our domain. Again, while we don't have any square roots or logarithms,
we do have a denominator with a variable in it. Again, our denominator cannot be
$0$, so let's evaluate for $x$ to determine what value of $x$ would give us $0$.

$$ 3x + 2 = 0 $$

$$ 3x = -2 $$

$$ x = -\frac{2}{3} $$

And we add this as a value to our _Domain_ that the value of $x$ cannot be:

$$ \text{Domain of } (f \circ g)(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \neq 0, x \neq -\frac{2}{3} \right\} $$

---

Let's now move on to the inverse composite function:

$$ (g \circ f)(x) $$

We have already determined the Domain of our inside function from the previous
example. Again the domain for our two functions were:

$$ \text{Domain for } f(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \neq -3 \right\} $$

$$ \text{Domain for } g(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \neq 0 \right\} $$

In this case, the inside function is $f(x)$ and the Domain of our composite
function $(g \circ f)(x)$ will carry this Domain restriction with it. Let's now
evaluate and simplify our composite function expression:

$$ (g \circ f)(x) = \frac{2}{\left(\dfrac{x}{x + 3}\right)} $$

We already can see that our Domain has the same restriction as the previous, as
we are going to have to multiply by $(x + 3)$ over itself. In this case the
domain of $f(x)$ applies to our new composite function. Let's build our
incomplete domain already:

$$ \text{Domain for } (g \circ f)(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \neq -3 \right\} $$

And continue with simplifying our composite function:

$$ (g \circ f)(x) = \frac{2}{\dfrac{x}{x + 3}} \cdot \frac{x + 3}{x + 3} $$

$$ (g \circ f)(x) = \frac{2(x + 3)}{x} $$

$$ (g \circ f)(x) = \frac{2x + 6}{x} $$

And now we have a Domain where $x$ cannot equal $0$, and we'll add that to our
Domain to complete this exercise:

$$ \text{Domain for } (g \circ f)(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \neq -3, x \neq 0 \right\} $$

---

Let's now move onto other Domain issues involving square roots.

Consider these two following functions:

$$ f(x) = x^2 + 1 $$

$$ g(x) = \sqrt{x - 1} $$

Let's now find the Domain of these two functions before moving onto finding the
Domain of their composites.

The domain for $f(x)$ isn't affected because it doesn't have any square roots,
any logarithms, nor any denominators with a variable in it. Thusly the domain
for $f(x)$ is all real numbers.

$$ \text{Domain for } f(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \text{ is All Real Numbers} \right\} $$

The domain for $g(x)$, however, is affected, as while it doesn't have any
logarithms nor denominators with variables in them, it _does_ have a square
root. Recall that our Domain of any square root numbers essentially restricts us
to positive numbers (and $0$), we can't allow negatives as that would result in
complex numbers, which cannot exist in our numbers set when determining Domains.
Thusly $x - 1$ cannot equal $0$. Let's evaluate for that number:

$$ x - 1 = 0 $$

$$ x = 1 $$

And therefore our $x$ must be _greater than or equal to_ $1$. And that is our
_Domain_ for $g(x)$:

$$ \text{Domain for } g(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x >= 1 \right\} $$

Let's now evaluate the composite function $(f \circ g)(x)$.

Let's go ahead and write this out and simplify.

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = (\sqrt{x - 1})^2 + 1 $$

Now, before continuing, let's take the domain of our inside function, $g(x)$ and
write that as our incomplete domain:

$$ \text{Domain for } (f \circ g)(x) \left\{x | x \geq 1 \right\}$$

Now let's return to our composite function and simplify.

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = (\sqrt{x - 1})^2 + 1 $$

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = x - 1 + 1 $$

$$ (f \circ g)(x) = x $$

Now, this is a preview of a
[future section](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fK7IPeeZoFE), but whenever you
compose two functions and when simplified you get the input (in this case, $x$),
then they are what is known as _Inverse Functions_ in that when composed they
"cancel" each other out or "undo" each other, _as long as we respect the
limitations already in place by the established Domain_ (_i.e._ $x \geq 1$). The
input gives you the same number for the output.

Okay, so when evaluating the output of this composite function to determine it's
Domain, we use the same rules as before. There are no square roots, no
logarithms, and no denominators with variables in it, thusly, the domain of this
composite function is all real numbers. We don't have to add this to our Domain,
as it is already more restricted than all real numbers, and thusly, in this
case, our Domain remains unchanged:

$$ \text{Domain for } (f \circ g)(x) \left\{x | x \geq 1 \right\}$$

---

Let's now breeze through the next one as it is just the other way around:

$$ (g \circ f)(x) $$

Again, we already evaluated the Domain for $f(x)$, which is our inside function
in this case.

$$ \text{Domain for } f(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \text{ is All Real Numbers} \right\} $$

Now let's write out our composite function:

$$ (g \circ f)(x) = \sqrt{(x^2 + 1) - 1} $$

Again, we bring over our Domain, which isn't restricted in this case. But let's
write out the domain of our composite function to keep track, regardless:

$$ \text{Domain for } (g \circ f)(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \text{ is All Real Numbers} \right\} $$

And now simplify:

$$ (g \circ f)(x) = \sqrt{(x^2 + 1) - 1} $$

$$ (g \circ f)(x) = \sqrt{x^2 + 1 - 1} $$

$$ (g \circ f)(x) = \sqrt{x^2} $$

$$ (g \circ f)(x) = x $$

Again, these are Inverses, as this further proves. And our domain remains as all
real numbers as when we evaluate this answer, we again realize there are no
square roots, no logarithms, and no denominators with variables in them, thusly
our domain remains:

$$ \text{Domain for } (g \circ f)(x) \text{ : } \left\{x | x \text{ is All Real Numbers} \right\} $$

Now, notice that the Domains for $(f \circ g)(x)$ and $(g \circ f)(x)$ are
different, this is because of which function acts as our "inside function", as
our _input_. Notice that this determines which Domain restrictions are "carried"
over into our composite function, which, when evaluated, _may_ add additional
restrictions onto our _Domain_.
