# Solving Exponential Equations with Common Bases (Precalculus - College Algebra 54)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gkUWLFontZU)

---

Now, we're going to find as we continue through this particular set of lectures,
that we have gone down a train of thought:

- There is such a thing as _One To One_ Functions where one input always equates
  to one _unique_ output.

- The fact that a Function is a _One To One_ Function indicates that there
  exists an _Inverse_ of that function.

- Composing a Function and it's _Inverse_ will yield back the input, effectively
  "undoing" the function (_i.e_ the function's operation does nothing but yield
  back the input).

This leads us to where we are currently in this series where we have discussed
_Exponential Functions_. In the previous section we talked about how
_Exponential Functions_ are indeed _One To One_ functions, and we introduced the
concept (but have not yet covered) the idea of _Logarithms_ which effectively
"undo" _Exponential Functions_ as they are the _Inverse_ of said Exponentials.

Before we move onto _Logarithms_, however, we will now briefly address one way
of solving Exponential Functions without the use of _Logarithms_. The methods
covered in this section can only be utilized _when there is a common base_.
Exactly what this means will become clear as we go through some examples, so
let's get started.

---

If $a^x = a^y$, then $x = y$.

Very essentially, when the bases are equal, but have two apparently different
exponential variables, then those exponential variables are equal.

Let's illustrate with a very simple example:

$$ 2^x = 2^3 $$

This means that $x$ is $3$, but only because they both have the base, $2$.

---

**Practice**

$$ 2^{-x} = 16 $$

Now, this may appear at first glance as not having common bases, but we can see
that $16$ is not a base prime number (_i.e._ it can be determined to be some
number to some power). Therefore, if we know that $16$ can also be written as
$2^4$, then we can evaluate our equation like so:

$$ 2^{-x} = 2^4 $$

And then we can evaluate from here based off of what we now know about
Exponentials With Common Bases:

$$ -x = 4 $$

$$ x = -4 $$

---

$$ 2^{2x - 1} = 4^{3x + 1} $$

Again, we don't have common bases... but $4$ can be expressed as a form of
$2^x$. To be clear, let's use parentheses in our new expression of our equation:

$$ 2^{2x - 1} = \left(2^2\right)^{(3x + 1)} $$

Recall that when you take an exponent to another exponent, you multiply them.

$$ 2^{2x - 1} = 2^{6x + 2}$$

Now our bases are the same, we can set the exponents equal to each other:

$$ 2x - 1 = 6x + 2 $$

And we can solve as usual from here:

$$ -3 = 4x $$

$$ -\frac{3}{4} = x $$

$$ x = -\frac{3}{4} $$

---

$$ 25^{x + 3} = \frac{1}{125} $$

Now, whenever you get a fraction on the other side of an exponential function,
you're going to want to make sure you set your exponent to a _negative_, as this
outputs a fraction.

We can write both sides of our function as $5$ to some power.

$$ \left(5^2\right)^{(x + 3)} = \frac{1}{5^3} $$

And recall that any fraction can be written as a negative exponent:

$$ \left(5^2\right)^{(x + 3)} = 5^{-3} $$

And now we can evaluate the left hand side by distribution:

$$ 5^{2x + 6}= 5^{-3} $$

And now we have a common base, let's now set the exponents to each other and
solve for $x$:

$$ 2x + 6 = -3 $$

$$ 2x = -9 $$

$$ x = -\frac{9}{2} $$

---

$$ 9^{2x} \cdot 27^{x^2} = \frac{1}{3} $$

We can probably see that there is a common base of $3$ for each of our terms
here:

$$ \left(3^2\right)^{2x} \cdot \left(3^3\right)^{x^2} = \frac{1}{3^1} $$

Now we can multiply our exponents on the left hand side, and also express our
fraction as a base with a negative exponent:

$$ 3^{4x} \cdot 3^{3x^2} = 3^{-1} $$

Recall also that when you multiply two exponents with the same base, you can
_add_ them (do _NOT_ multiply them). (Side Note: conversely, if we were dividing
two exponents with common bases, we would _subtract_ those exponents).

$$ 3^{4x + 3x^2} = 3^{-1} $$

And now we have a common base:

$$ 3x^2 + 4x = -1 $$

Note that if we have $x^2$, we probably cannot solve this directly, we'll need,
square root method, factoring, or the quadratic formula. Let's try to factor:

$$ 3x^2 + 4x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ (x + 1)(3x + 1) = 0 $$

$$ x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{x = -1} $$

$$ 3x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ 3x = -1 $$

$$ \boxed{x = -\frac{1}{3}} $$

---

$$ 3^{x^2} \cdot \frac{1}{3^7} = 27^{2x} $$

This looks complicated, and it is somewhat, but let's simplify first by trying
to write any larger bases as the smaller one, as that is the most apparent way
to proceed.

$$ 3^{x^2} \cdot \frac{1}{3^7} = \left(3^3\right)^{2x} $$

Now, let's address the fraction by simply making it a negative exponent:

$$ 3^{x^2} \cdot 3^{-7} = \left(3^3\right)^{2x} $$

Now we can address the right hand side by multiplying our exponent:

$$ 3^{x^2} \cdot 3^{-7} = 3^{6x} $$

And when we multiply expressions with common bases, we can _add_ the exponents
over the same base:

$$ 3^{x^2 - 7} = 3^{6x} $$

And now we have the same base on each side of the equation, we can set the
exponents equal and solve for $x$:

$$ x^2 - 7 = 6x $$

And with the power of $2$, we'll have to use factoring, square root method,
quadratic formula, etc. to solve for $x$:

$$ x^2 - 6x - 7 = 0 $$

$$ (x - 7)(x + 1) = 0 $$

$$ x - 7 = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{x = 7} $$

$$ x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{x = -1} $$

---

$$ \mathbf{e}^{x^2} = \mathbf{e}^{3x} \cdot \frac{1}{\mathbf{e}^2} $$

While the presence of $\mathbf{e}$ may make this look complicated, it actually
simplifies things for us as we know that our common base is $\mathbf{e}$. All we
have to do is change the way that the fraction on the right hand side is
expressed:

$$ \mathbf{e}^{x^2} = \mathbf{e}^{3x} \cdot \mathbf{e}^{-2} $$

And once again, we can _add_ our exponents because of the common base on the
right hand side:

$$ \mathbf{e}^{x^2} = \mathbf{e}^{3x - 2} $$

And now we can proceed as before by setting the exponents equal to each other
now that the bases are the same:

$$ x^2 = 3x - 2 $$

Again, the square exponent indicates that we have a quadratic, so we can solve
using one of the usual methods:

$$ x^2 - 3x + 2 = 0 $$

$$ (x - 2)(x - 1) = 0 $$

$$ x - 2 = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{x = 2} $$

$$ x - 1 = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{x = 1} $$
