# Introduction to Solving Logarithms and Exponentials (Precalculus - College Algebra 57)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KezbqAAlOZk)

---

In this lecture, we're going to cover how to solve _Logarithms_ with
_Exponentials_, as well as how to solve _Exponentials_ with _Logarithms_. This
will give you a good introduction to solving _Logarithms_ and _Exponentials_
when you _cannot find common bases_.

---

**Steps:**

1. Look for Common Bases _first_!

2. For _Logarithms_, write the equation in _Exponential Form_.

3. For _Exponentials_, write in _Logarithm Form_.

---

$$ \log_{2}{(2x + 1)} = 3 $$

First, let's look for common bases, this means we have a Log on one side, and a
Log on the other. In this case we don't have that, so we move on.

We can now write this in _Exponential Form_, as we have a constant on one side
of the equation and a Log on the other.

Always know that the base can be raised to the exponential (the constant on the
other side of the equation), and then set equal to the argument of our Log to
write it in _Exponential Form_.

$$ 2^3 = 2x + 1 $$

And then we can solve for $x$:

$$ 8 = 2x + 1 $$

$$ 7 = 2x $$

$$ \frac{7}{2} = x $$

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{7}{2}} $$

Now, we always have to double check our answer to ensure that we don't plug a
negative into the _Logarithm_. _Logarithms cannot have negative arguments_!

$$ \log_{2}{\left(2\left(\frac{7}{2}\right) + 1\right)} = 3 $$

$$ \log_{2}{(7 + 1)} = 3 $$

$$ \log_{2}{8} = 3 $$

And this is a true statement.

---

$$ \log_{3}{(x^2 + 1)} = 2 $$

No common bases, moving on...

$$ 3^2 = x^2 + 1 $$

$$ 9 = x^2 + 1 $$

$$ 8 = x^2 $$

$$ x = \pm \sqrt{8} $$

$$ \boxed{x = \pm 2\sqrt{2}} $$

Now, it is true that we can never plug in a negative number into our argument,
but squaring any number other than $0$ will always result in a positive number.
And adding a $1$ to it further ensures this never happens, so both positive and
negative values for $x$ here are acceptable answers.

---

$$ \ln{(-2x + 1)} = 8 $$

Common bases? Nah, moving on...

$$ \mathbf{e}^8 = -2x + 1 $$

Now, we're not going to approximate the value for $\mathbf{e}$ here. We want an
_exact_ solution.

$$ \mathbf{e}^8 - 1 = -2x $$

$$ \frac{\mathbf{e}^8 - 1}{-2} = x $$

$$ \boxed{x = -\frac{\mathbf{e}^8 - 1}{2}} $$

If we did want an approximation, we would plug this into a calculator. Note that
you would want to apply the approximation to the exact solution, not prior in
any other step, as that would make the approximation less accurate.

---

$$ \log_{6}{36} = 5x + 4 $$

Now, here it doesn't appear we have common bases, and we don't, we don't have
two Logs with the same base. But what we do have is this when rewritten:

$$ \log_{6}{6^2} = 5x + 4 $$

Which, when written in _Exponential Form_ gives us:

$$ 6^{(5x + 4)} = 6^2 $$

This is _Exponential Form_ with _Common Bases_, which we covered in a previous
section, thusly we can simply set the exponents equal to each other to solve for
$x$:

$$ 5x + 4 = 2 $$

$$ 5x = -2 $$

$$ x = -\frac{2}{5} $$

---

What if we want to solve for the base instead?

$$ \log_{x}{\left(\frac{1}{8}\right)} = 3 $$

Check for common bases as always, we don't have any. So let's write this in
_Exponential Form_:

$$ x^3 = \frac{1}{8} $$

When solving these, a brief note, the _base_ and _argument_ of a Log _must be
positive_. Thusly when we get $x$, which is our _base_, it must be _positive_.
This means, that if our exponent were even, instead of odd, here, we would have
to omit any negative solutions for $x$.

$$ \sqrt[3]{x^3} = \sqrt[3]{\frac{1}{8}} $$

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{1}{2}} $$

---

**Solving Exponentials With Logarithms**

Recall that we have already covered solving _Exponentials_ with _Common Bases_.
Now we are going to solve _Exponentials_ where there is no common base. We will
always check for that first, as that makes our work easier, but failing that, we
will use Logarithms when there are no _Common Bases_.

---

$$ 7^{2x + 5} = 8 $$

We can't find any common bases between $7$ and $8$. Thusly we have to use a
_Logarithm_ to solve for $x$.

$$ 7^{2x + 5} = 8 $$

$$ \log_{7}{8} = 2x + 5 $$

Now, leave the $\log$ notation here. Don't try to evaluate it using a
calculator. We want an exact answer, and if we're using Logarithms to solve our
equation, it means we have no common bases, and in a way, have no way of getting
a whole number exact answer.

$$ \log_{7}{8} = 2x + 5 $$

$$ \log_{7}{(8)} - 5 = 2x $$

Notice the use of parentheses here, this is to make absolutely sure that we
don't confuse the $-5$ as part of the Log's argument. This is standard practice
when writing out Logs, and when in doubt, include parentheses in your notation.

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{\log_{7}{(8)} - 5}{2}} $$

---

$$ 5\mathbf{e}^{0.2x} = 7 $$

Now, in order to solve this easily, we're going to need to first divide
everything by $5$. This is because we need to isolate the base (in this case
$\mathbf{e}$) from everything else.

$$ \mathbf{e}^{0.2x} = \frac{7}{5} $$

Now we can more easily see how we can write this in Logarithmic Form:

$$ \log_{\mathbf{e}}{\left(\frac{7}{5}\right)} = 0.2x $$

This isn't quite the right form, but it makes explicit what is happening for
illustrative purposes. Let's now write it using the natural log as it is
traditionally done:

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{7}{5}\right)} = 0.2x $$

And now just solve for $x$:

$$ x = \frac{\ln{\left(\dfrac{7}{5}\right)}}{0.2} $$

This is acceptable, but a bit awkward to look at, let's multiply by
$\dfrac{5}{5}$ to give us a denominator of $1$ and adjust the form:

$$ x = \frac{\ln{\left(\dfrac{7}{5}\right)}}{0.2} \cdot \frac{5}{5} $$

$$ \boxed{x = 5\ln{\left(\frac{7}{5}\right)}} $$

---

$$ 8 \cdot 10^{2x - 7} = 3 $$

$$ 10^{2x - 7} = \frac{3}{8} $$

$$ \log_{10}{\left(\frac{3}{8}\right)} = 2x - 7 $$

Which again, is improper form, but here for illustrative purposes, let's use the
_Common Log_ as is tradition:

$$ \log{\left(\frac{3}{8}\right)} = 2x - 7 $$

And now just solve for $x$:

$$ \log{\left(\frac{3}{8}\right)} = 2x - 7 $$

$$ \log{\left(\frac{3}{8}\right)} + 7  = 2x $$

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{\log{\left(\dfrac{3}{8}\right) + 7}}{2}} $$

---

$$ 4\mathbf{e}^{x + 1} = 5 $$

$$ \mathbf{e}^{x + 1} = \frac{5}{4} $$

$$ \log_{\mathbf{e}}{\left(\frac{5}{4}\right)} = x + 1 $$

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{5}{4}\right)} = x + 1 $$

$$ \boxed{x = \ln{\left(\frac{5}{4}\right)} - 1} $$
