# Properties of Logarithms (Precalculus - College Algebra 58)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u0uScdsBPfk)

---

In this section, we're going to talk about 4 properties of Logarithms that will
help us in further sections solving more complicated Logarithmic Equations using
Combinations, Expansions, and changing Common Bases of Logarithms.

1. If you ever have a Logarithhm where the _argument_ is $1$, that Logarithm
   will always equal $0$.

   $$ \log_{a}{1} = 0 $$

2. If you ever have a Logarithm where the _base_ and the _argument_ are the
   same, that Logarithm will always equal $1$:

   $$ \log_{a}{a} = 1 $$

3. If you ever have a Logarithm where the _argument_ is an _exponential_ with
   the same _base_ as the _base_ of the Logarithm, then that Logarithm will
   always equal the _exponent_:

   $$ \log_{a}{a^r} = r $$

4. Similarly to the previous rule, an _exponent_ raised to the power of a
   Logarithm with the same _base_ will return the _argument_ of that Logarithm:

   $$ a^{\log_{a}{M}} = M $$

---

**Examples**

We'll now provide some quick examples to really hammer home these concepts:

---

$$ \log_{2}{2^{-13}} = \text{ ?} $$

$$ \log_{2}{2^{-13}} = -13 $$

Now, don't look at this as simple rules, _understand_ that when we are placing
an exponent into a logarithm, we are composing to functions, two operations,
that, because they have the same base, are _Inverses_ of each other. This is why
they cancel out, and why they give us back, in this case, the exponent of the
Log's argument.

---

$$ \log{10^{\frac{1}{3}}} = \text{ ?} $$

$$ \log{10^{\frac{1}{3}}} = \frac{1}{3} $$

We have a base of $10$ as this is a _Common Log_, $10$ to _what power_ equals
$10^{\frac{1}{3}}$?

---

$$ \ln{\mathbf{e}^{-4}} = \text{ ?} $$

Same idea, $\mathbf{e}$ to _what power_ equals $\mathbf{e}^{-4}$?

$$ \ln{\mathbf{e}^{-4}} = -4 $$

---

$$ 2^{\log_{2}{7}} = \text{ ?} $$

Here we have an exponential where it's power is a Log with the same base. Again,
they compose as they are inverses of each other leaving only the Log's argument:

$$ 2^{\log_{2}{7}} = 7 $$

---

$$ 10^{\log{\frac{1}{4}}} = \text{ ?} $$

Again, same idea, the exponential, $10$ raised to a _Common Log_ cancels out
because they have the same base:

$$ 10^{\log{\frac{1}{4}}} = \frac{1}{4} $$

---

$$ \mathbf{e}^{\ln{8}} = \text{ ?} $$

Same idea again. $\mathbf{e}$ raised to a _Natural Log_ cancles out because they
have the same base:

$$ \mathbf{e}^{\ln{8}} = 8 $$

---

Now, we're going to talk about a few more properties of Logarithms. Consider the
following:

$$ \log_{a}{(M \cdot N)} = \text{ ?} $$

Now, we're not asking for a solve here, we're asking what are properties of
Exponentials that can inform the properties of Logarithms?

Consider what happens when we multiply Exponentials:

$$ x^m \cdot x^n = \text{ ?} $$

We have covered in previous lectures in Algebra that this is equal to:

$$ x^m \cdot x^n = x^{m + n} $$

Similary, we can add two Logs together when we see an argument that is
multiplied:

$$ \log_{a}{(M \cdot N)} = \log_{a}{M} + \log_{a}{N} $$

Note that the above statement is true, but please don't confuse this. The
following statements use the $\neq$ non-equality operator to emphasize what this
does _not_ mean:

$$ \log_{a}{(M \cdot N)} \neq \log_{a}{M} \cdot \log_{a}{N} $$

$$ \log_{a}{(M + N)} \neq \log_{a}{M} + \log_{a}{N} $$

---

$$ \log_{a}{\left(\frac{M}{N}\right)} = \text{ ?} $$

You might be able to now infer what this means. Recall that with exponents if we
have the following:

$$ x^m \div x^n = \text{ ?} $$

This can also be expressed as:

$$ x^m \div x^n = x^{m - n} $$

And, as you expect, this means we can expand this Log by subtraction:

$$ \log_{a}{\left(\frac{M}{N}\right)} = \log_{a}{M} - \log_{a}{N} $$

Again, here are some $\neq$ statements to hammer home what you _cannot_ do when
expanding Logs:

$$ \log_{a}{(M - N)} \neq \log_{a}{M} - \log_{a}{N} $$

$$ \log_{a}{\left(\frac{M}{N}\right)} \neq \log_{a}{M} \div \log_{a}{N} $$

$$ \log_{a}{\left(\frac{M}{N}\right)} \neq \frac{\log_{a}{M}}{\log_{a}{N}} $$

---

$$ \log_{a}{M^r} = \text{ ?} $$

This one is interesting, called the _Power Property_. If you ever have an
exponent in the argument of a Logarithm, you can always move that exponent to
the front of the Log as a _coefficient_:

$$ \log_{a}{M^r} = r\log_{a}{M} $$

---

Let's now practice with these new properties we just learned.

Expand out the following _Logarithms_:

---

$$ \log_{5}{(25x)} $$

First and foremost when we think about expanding these expressions, we want to
think, is their a product in my argument? Yes there is. so we can think of this
expression as:

$$ \log_{5}{(25 \cdot x)} $$

Which evalutes to:

$$ \log_{5}{(25 \cdot x)} = \log_{5}{25} + \log_{5}{x} $$

Can we simplify further? Well the $\log_{5}{25}$ can indeed be expanded using
the _Product Property_:

$$ \log_{5}{(25 \cdot x)} = \log_{5}{5^2} + \log_{5}{x} $$

$$ \log_{5}{(25 \cdot x)} = 2\log_{5}{5} + \log_{5}{x} $$

But the Log of any argument that has the same base simply equals $1$:

$$ \log_{5}{(25 \cdot x)} = 2(1) + \log_{5}{x} $$

$$ \boxed{\log_{5}{(25x)} = 2 + \log_{5}{x}} $$

Notice that this form of it is _easier to graph_.

---

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}}{x}\right)} $$

We can separate quotients by subtraction:

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}}{x}\right)} = \ln{\mathbf{e}} - \ln{x} $$

Further simplification shows that $\ln{\mathbf{e}}$ is just $1$:

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}}{x}\right)} = 1 - \ln{x} $$

And again, this is easier to graph (once we put it in proper form).

---

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{x}{\mathbf{e}^x}\right)} $$

We can exapand this quotient just like the last one using subtraction:

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{x}{\mathbf{e}^x}\right)} = \ln{x} - \ln{\mathbf{e}^x} $$

And we can further simplify by recognizing that $\ln{\mathbf{e}^x}$ is just $x$:

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{x}{\mathbf{e}^x}\right)} = \ln{x} - x $$
