# How to Expand Logarithms (Precalculus - College Algebra 59)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qCeN653SdX4)

---

In the previous section, we covered an introduction to properties of Logarithms.
To review some of what we covered, here are some expressions that hopefully now
you have become familiar with:

$$ \log_{a}{(M \cdot N)} = \log_{a}{M} + \log_{a}{N} $$

$$ \log_{a}{\left(\frac{M}{N}\right)} = \log_{a}{M} - \log_{a}N $$

$$ \log_{a}{M^r} = r\log_{a}{M} $$

In this section we are going to use these basic expansion techniques for
expressing Logarithms to further our understanding of Logarithms in general.
Why? Well in Calculus I and Calculus II, you will likely need to know how to
expand Logarithms and then take the derivative.

This probably will make more sense once you get there, but for now, just trust
that these techniques of expanding Logarithms will become particularly useful in
future studies.

---

One of the first thing to understand when looking at the argument of our
logarithm, and attempting to expand said logarithm, is that we're going to want
to ensure our argument is _Factored_, this will make it easier to reason about
how to expand the logarithm.

We'll also write any radicals as exponentials to a fractional power.

Let's demonstrate with an example.

---

$$ \ln{(x^2\sqrt{1 - x})} $$

This is already factored, but we can write the radical as an exponential:

$$ \ln{(x^2 \cdot (1 - x)^{\frac{1}{2}})} $$

Notice also the $\cdot$ multiplication symbol, we are choosing explicitly to
show that there is a product here.

The important question to ask before attempting to expand is "what operation is
connecting my argument?"

In the above case it is multiplication, but consider if we had written this
incorrectly?:

$$ \ln{((x^2 \cdot 1 - x)^{\frac{1}{2}})} $$

Now this would be the exponent that is connecting the whole thing together, so
pay attention when you are looking for how to expand logarithms, it is easy to
accidentally expand it using incorrect logic.

Let's now return to our correctly evaluated statement thus far:

$$ \ln{(x^2 \cdot (1 - x)^{\frac{1}{2}})} $$

Now we know we can use addition of two logarithms with the same base:

$$ \ln{(x^2 \cdot (1 - x)^{\frac{1}{2}})} = \ln{(x^2)} + \ln{(1 - x)^{\frac{1}{2}}} $$

And any exponent can be written as a coefficient (on both our terms here):

$$ \ln{(x^2)} + \ln{(1 - x)^{\frac{1}{2}}} = \boxed{2\ln{x} + \frac{1}{2}\ln{(1 - x)}} $$

Notice that we cannot expand the argument $(1 - x)$, it is not within the
confines of our properties of Logarithms, we can only expand
multiplication/divison into addition/subtraction, _not_ the other way around.

---

$$ \log_{5}{\left(\frac{\sqrt[3]{x^2 + 1}}{x^2 - 1}\right)} $$

Can we factor? only the denominator:

$$ \log_{5}{\left(\frac{\sqrt[3]{x^2 + 1}}{(x - 1)(x + 1)}\right)} $$

We also can set ourselves up to expand for the _Product Property_ on the
numerator by writing any roots as exponentials with a fractional exponent:

$$ \log_{5}{\left(\frac{(x^2 + 1)^{\frac{1}{3}}}{(x - 1)(x + 1)}\right)} $$

Now, how is this joined together? Is it an exponent? Or is it
multiplication/division? We can figure this out a bit better by being explicit:

$$ \log_{5}{\left(\frac{(x^2 + 1)^{\frac{1}{3}}}{(x - 1) \cdot (x + 1)}\right)} $$

Division is our primary connection, but there is also a multiplication
connection in the denominator. We will first start by expanding using the
primary division operator, and then move on. Always do expansion of logarithms
one step at a time. It is easy to get confused, always look for your main
operation first within the logarithm's arguments.

$$ \log_{5}{(x^2 + 1)^{\frac{1}{3}}} - (\log_{5}{((x - 1) \cdot (x + 1))}) $$

Now, that's a lot of parentheses. The reason for this is to make sure we
understand that when we expand the multiplication log next, that we don't lose
the sign! Both of those arguments will be subtracted because they are part of
one operation encompassed by the parentheses!

Once expanded out further, we get:

$$ \log_{5}{(x^2 + 1)^{\frac{1}{3}}} - (\log_{5}{(x - 1)} + \log_{5}{(x + 1)}) $$

And now hopefully you see it, the subtraction is over a big parentheses,
changing the addition operation to a subtraction when the parentheses are
removed:

$$ \log_{5}{(x^2 + 1)^{\frac{1}{3}}} - \log_{5}{(x - 1)} - \log_{5}{(x + 1)} $$

And now the first term can have the $\dfrac{1}{3}$ set up front as a coefficient
thanks to the _Product Property_.

$$ \boxed{\frac{1}{3}\log_{5}{(x^2 + 1)} - \log_{5}{(x - 1)} - \log_{5}{(x + 1)}} $$

---

$$ \log{\left(\frac{x^3\sqrt{x + 1}}{(x - 2)^2(x - 1)}\right)} $$

$$ \log{\left(\frac{x^3 \cdot (x + 1)^{\frac{1}{2}}}{(x - 2)^2 \cdot (x - 1)}\right)} $$

$$ \log{\left(x^3 \cdot (x + 1)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)} - \left(\log{\left((x - 2)^2 \cdot (x - 1)\right)}\right) $$

$$ \log{(x^3)} + \log{(x + 1)^\frac{1}{2}} - \left(\log{(x - 2)^2 + \log{(x - 1)}}\right) $$

$$ 3\log{(x)} + \frac{1}{2}\log{(x + 1)} - 2\log{(x - 2)} - \log{(x - 1)} $$

---

$$ \ln{\left[\frac{5x^2\sqrt[3]{7 - 2x}}{4(x + 1)^2}\right]} $$

$$ \ln{\left[\frac{5 \cdot x^2 \cdot (7 - 2x)^{\frac{1}{3}}}{4 \cdot (x + 1)^2}\right]} $$

$$ \left[\ln(5) + \ln(x^2) + \ln{(7 - 2x)^{\frac{1}{3}}}\right] - \left[\ln{(4)} + \ln{(x + 2)^2}\right] $$

$$ \left[\ln{(5)} + 2\ln{(x)} + \frac{1}{3}\ln{(7 - 2x)}\right] - \left[\ln{(4)} + 2\ln{(x + 2)} \right] $$

$$ \ln{(5)} + 2\ln{(x)} + \frac{1}{3}\ln{(7 - 2x)} - \ln(4) - 2\ln{(x + 2)} $$

---

$$ \log\left[\frac{(x - 4)^2}{x^2 - 9}\right]^{\frac{2}{3}} $$

Despite the fact that we have the obvious unforeseen aspect of this problem
where we have an exponent to the $\dfrac{2}{3}$, we're still going to factor
first:

$$ \log\left[\frac{(x - 4)^2}{(x - 3)(x + 3)}\right]^{\frac{2}{3}} $$

We can now move the exponent as a coefficient over the entire logarithm:

$$ \frac{2}{3}\log\left[\frac{(x - 4)^2}{(x - 3) \cdot (x + 3)}\right] $$

Now we can expand out based off the primary division operator and expand to
subtracting logs:

$$ \frac{2}{3}\left[\log{(x - 4)^2} - \left[\log{(x - 3)} + \log{(x + 3)}\right]\right] $$

Notice that we have $\dfrac{2}{3}$ multiplying over the entire expansion. We
will distribute as a last step, but not here. Let's finish our expansion first.

$$ \frac{2}{3}\left[2\log{(x - 4)} - \log{(x - 3)} - \log{(x + 3)} \right] $$

Now, let's distribute:

$$ \boxed{\frac{4}{3}\log{(x - 4)} - \frac{2}{3}\log{(x - 3)} - \frac{2}{3}\log{(x + 3)}} $$
