# How to Combine Logarithms (Precalculus - College Algebra 60)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YrU8fYchnIU)

---

This section will cover the reverse operation of the previous. In the previous
section, we learned how to take a single logarithm and expand it out into
multiple logarithms (which will eventually be utilized for solving for
differentials in Calculus).

In this section, we are going to do the inverse, and take multiple logarithms
and combine them into a single one. Note that the following are simply the same
rules as covered previously, but reversed:

$$ \log_{a}{M} + \log_{a}{N} = \log_{a}{(M \cdot N)} $$

$$ \log_{a}{M} - \log_{a}{N} = \log_{a}{\left(\frac{M}{N}\right)} $$

$$ r \cdot \log_{a}{M} = \log_{a}{M^r} $$

---

The order of operations for combining logarithms really follows one set of steps
and there isn't much room for interpretation:

1. Take all coefficients and make them the exponent/power of the argument inside
   the logarithm.

2. We're going to take the logarithms that have the same _base_ that are being
   added/subtracted and set them up as a single argument that is
   multiplied/divided.

---

$$ \frac{1}{2}\log_{3}{x} - 3\log_{3}{x} $$

$$ \log_{3}{x^\frac{1}{2}} - \log_{3}{x^3} $$

$$ \log_{3}{\left(\frac{x^{\frac{1}{2}}}{x^3}\right)} $$

It is important that when we have a fraction with a common base (in this case,
$x$), we want to simplify the fraction based off the rules of exponents:

$$ \log_{3}{\left(\frac{1}{x^{(3 - \frac{1}{2})}}\right)} $$

$$ \log_{3}{\left(\frac{1}{x^{\frac{5}{2}}}\right)} $$

Which is further combined as:

$$ \boxed{\log_{3}{\left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{x^5}}\right)}} $$

You could also ratioinalize the answer like so:

$$ \log_{3}{\left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{x^5}}\right)} \rightarrow \log_{3}{\left(\frac{1}{x^2\sqrt{x}} \cdot \frac{\sqrt{x}}{\sqrt{x}}\right)} \rightarrow \log_{3}{\left(\frac{\sqrt{x}}{x^2 \cdot x}\right)} \rightarrow \log_{3}{\left(\frac{\sqrt{x}}{x^3}\right)} $$

---

$$ \log_{4}{(x^2 - 1)} - 5\log_{4}{(x + 1)} $$

Now, we move our coefficients to be powers of our argument. Do we move the $-5$
or $5$? We could do either, but it is advisable to just move the positive form
of the coefficient as it makes things generally easier:

$$ \log_{4}{(x^2 - 1)} - \log_{4}{(x + 1)^5} $$

We now can create one logarithm with a quotient:

$$ \log_{4}{\left(\frac{x^2 - 1}{(x + 1)^5}\right)} $$

And now we factor:

$$ \log_{4}{\left(\frac{(x + 1)(x - 1)}{(x + 1)^5}\right)} $$

And this cancels out one of the factors on the denominator:

$$ \log_{4}{\left(\frac{x - 1}{(x + 1)^4}\right)} $$

Notice that we went in the opposite order of operations of expansion here. We
placed our coefficients as exponents in our arguments _first_, we then combined
it into one logarithm based off the major operation (addition becomes
multiplication, subtraction becomes division), and then finally we factor in
order to simplify.

---

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{x}{x - 1}\right)} + \ln{\left(\frac{x + 1}{x}\right)} - \ln{(x^2 - 1)} $$

Now, we don't have any coefficients to turn into argument's exponents.

We do have multiple terms which can confuse us what is happening though. Just
keep in mind that when we add, we have factors that multiply on the numerator,
and whenever we have subtraction/negative terms that means they are factors on
the denominator.

$$ \ln{\left[\frac{\left(\dfrac{x}{x - 1}\right) \cdot \left(\dfrac{x + 1}{x}\right)}{x^2 - 1}\right]} $$

And now we cross multiply the numerator, and factor the denominator:

$$ \ln\left[\frac{\left(\dfrac{x + 1}{x - 1}\right)}{(x + 1)(x - 1)}\right] $$

Now, this is a complex fraction, we can simplify complex fractions by
multiplying by the LCD of both the numerator and the denominator, in this case
the LCD is $(x - 1)$:

$$ \ln{\left[\frac{\left(\dfrac{x + 1}{x - 1}\right)}{(x + 1)(x - 1)} \cdot \frac{(x - 1)}{(x - 1)} \right]} $$

Which evaluates to:

$$ \ln{\left[\frac{(x + 1)}{(x - 1)^2(x + 1)}\right]} $$

But now notice that we have a factor $(x + 1)$ that can be simplified out as
well:

$$ \ln{\left[\frac{1}{(x - 1)^2} \right]} $$

---

$$ 21\log_{3}{\left(\sqrt[3]{x}\right)} + \log_{3}{(9)} + 2\log_{3}{(x)} - \log_{3}{(9)} $$

We want to first move our coefficients as argument exponents, but perhaps
changing our cube root to an exponent fraction might help:

$$ 21\log_{3}{\left(x^{\frac{1}{3}}\right)} + \log_{3}{(9)} + 2\log_{3}{(x)} - \log_{3}{(9)} $$

And now when we multiply $21$ by $\dfrac{1}{3}$ we get $7$:

$$ \log_{3}{\left(x^{7}\right)} + \log_{3}{(9)} + 2\log_{3}{(x)} - \log_{3}{(9)} $$

And the other coefficient is easily moved to be it's argument's exponent:

$$ \log_{3}{\left(x^{7}\right)} + \log_{3}{(9)} + \log_{3}{(x^2)} - \log_{3}{(9)} $$

Notice that we could simplify $\log_{3}{9}$ to $2$, but our goal is to combine
logarithms, and if we did this we wouldn't have the same base.

Notice also that we can get rid of the two $\log_{3}{9}$ altogether because they
subtract out! But think on this for a moment, because of subtraction, well this
is two different factors, one on the numerator, one on the denominator, that are
the same! This would also cancel out later on in the operation! We're going to
go with the latter.

$$ \log_{3}{\left(\frac{x^7 \cdot 9 \cdot x^2}{9}\right)} $$

And here we can see we can cancel out the $9$:

$$ \log_{3}{x^7 \cdot x^2} $$

And finally, just use the multiplication rule of two common base exponents and
add the exponents for $x$:

$$ \log_{3}{x^9} $$

---

The last example Professor Leonard utilizes is quite lengthy, so I'll tell you
to just pick up the video at 20:30 and observe.
