# How to Change the Base of a Logarithm (Precalculus - College Algebra 61)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tgcFt8zGnNE)

---

This will be a short lecture. Sometimes you will need to change the base of your
logarithm and your calculator, for whatever reason, won't allow you to.

To change the base of a logarithm, you can always simply create a ratio.

You can pick whatever base you want.

$$ \log_{a}{b} = \frac{\log_{c}{b}}{\log_{c}{a}} $$

Notice here that the argument goes to the numerator, and the base goes to the
denominator.

Now, since we can choose whichever base we want for this new ratio/fraction, we
usually will choose either the _Common Log_ or the _Natural Log_:

$$ \frac{\log{b}}{\log{a}} \text{ OR } \frac{\ln{b}}{\ln{a}} $$

And this we can plug into our calculator.

---

Another note. Consider the following statement:

$$ \frac{\log_{c}{b}}{\log_{c}{a}} = \log_{a}{b} $$

Notice that we DID NOT subtract this, that is NOT what happens when you divide
two logs, it is what happens when you divide the _argument_ of a single Log.

$$ \frac{\log_{c}{b}}{\log_{c}{a}} \neq \log_{c}{b} - \log_{c}{a} $$

---

**Examples**

---

$$ \log_{5}{18} $$

We can expand any logarithm into a ratio:

$$ \log_{5}{18} = \frac{\log{18}}{\log{5}} $$

We could use any base, but because we're just trying to get log our calculator
recognizes, we probably want to use either the _Common Log_ or the _Natural
Log_. In fact:

$$ \frac{\log{18}}{\log{5}} = \frac{\ln{18}}{\ln{5}} $$

If we plug both these fractions into our calculator, we will find they give us
the same answer!

---

$$ \log_{\sqrt{5}}{7} $$

$$ \log_{\sqrt{5}}{7} = \frac{\log{7}}{\log{\sqrt{5}}} $$

---

$$ \log_{\pi}{\mathbf{e}} $$

It might be obvious, but we probably want to use the _Natural Log_ here.

$$ \log_{\pi}{\mathbf{e}} = \frac{\ln{\mathbf{e}}}{\ln{\pi}} $$

And now you see why, because we can simplify this to:

$$ \log_{\pi}{\mathbf{e}} = \frac{1}{\ln{\pi}} $$

Note that sometimes choosing an unusual base can be beneficial if for whatever
reason we need a $1$ on the numerator. Also notice that the base and argument
swap places on the denominator when doing this.
