# Solving Logarithms with Common Bases (Precalculus - College Algebra 62)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=82fonULPl64)

---

Much like how Exponentials have a sort of "special case" where you can easily
solve exponentials with a common base, the same holds true with solving
Logarithmic equations.

In fact the rules are quite similar:

- If $\log_{a}{x} = \log_{a}{y}$, then $x = y$.

- _Only_ if _all_ terms are _Logs_ with the _same base_.

---

Prior to solving any Logarithms (or any function/equation for that matter), we
want to try and think of what is the _Domain_ of our function/equation?

Keep in mind that the argument of any Logarithm (the part after the _base_
within the parentheses), cannot be negative nor can it be $0$. It must be a
positive number!

This means that when we solve Logarithms, we can assume that if we are given a
Logarithm in the problem statement, that it is assumed that the arguments of all
Logarithms follow this _Domain_ restriction, and we can omit any evaluations
that yield $0$ or a negative number. This doesn't mean that when a negative
number is yielded when finding the solution that we automatically omit it, as it
has to equal to $0$ or a negative number inside the entire argument, not
necessarily just a negative variable that is a part of the argument.

---

$$ \log_{4}{(x + 2)} = \log_{4}{8} $$

The Logs' bases are the same, and thusly we can simply set the arguments equal
and solve for $x$.

$$ x + 2 = 8 $$

$$ \boxed{x = 6} $$

---

Before evaluating these, we always want to ask "Do I have all Logs of the same
base?", "Do I have Logs of different bases?", "Do I have constants?". If we have
any terms that are within the latter two categories, then we would solve these
Logarithms using exponentials. Only if the first case is true, do we proceed
with these methods. Let's move on.

---

$$ 3\log_{2}{x} = -\log_{2}{27} $$

Here we have a coefficient $3$ ahead of our left hand side Log. We'll need to
use logic from the _Power Rule_ to move this as an exponent to our Logarithm.
This will make it easier for us to reason about. Similarly, we'll move the $-1$
coefficient of the right hand side Logarithm.

$$ \log_{2}{x^3} = \log_{2}{\left(\frac{1}{27}\right)} $$

And now we can set the arguments equal to each other and solve for $x$:

$$ x^3 = \frac{1}{27} $$

$$ \sqrt[3]{x} = \sqrt[3]{\frac{1}{27}} $$

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{1}{3}} $$

Note that because we take a cube and not a square root, we don't have to worry
about the sign.

You should at this point check your answer by plugging in your answer into the
_Original Equation_.

---

$$ \log_{a}{(x - 1)} - \log_{a}{(x + 6)} = \log_{a}{(x - 2)} - \log_{a}{(x + 3)} $$

Here we're going to combine the logarithms on each side. We have covered
Combining Logarithms in a previous lecture. Recall that subtraction means that
we can take the arguments and divide them, with the positive terms being on the
numberator as a factor, and the negative terms being on the denominator as a
factor:

$$ \log_{a}{\left(\frac{x - 1}{x + 6}\right)} = \log_{a}{\left(\frac{x - 2}{x + 3}\right)} $$

Notice again, we've set one logarithm of a base to equal a logarithm of the same
base. Note also, as covered in the previous section, it doesn't really matter
what the base is, as long as they are the same, we could have a _Common Log_ or
a _Natural Log_ here and it would still equal out to the arguments being equal.

$$ \frac{x - 1}{x + 6} = \frac{x - 2}{x + 3} $$

And here we just default back to Intermediate Algebra here. Let's cross
multiply.

$$ (x - 1)(x + 3) = (x + 6)(x - 2) $$

And yeah, let's get everything to one side and probably factor to find our
answer (or use square root method or use the quadratic formula):

$$ x^2 + 2x - 3 = x^2 + 4x - 12 $$

Oh, the power $2$ cancels out, no need to factor then...

$$ 9 = 2x $$

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{9}{2}} $$

Now, is it okay to get a fraction? Yeah, no worries. Is it okay to get a
negative? Yes, but only if when evaluated within our _Original Problem
Statement_'s arguments, that it doesn't equal to $0$ or a negative number. We
would plug this in and see if it works out to double check our work.

---

$$ \log_{3}{x} - 2\log_{3}{5} = \log_{3}{(x + 1)} - 2\log_{3}{10} $$

$$ \log_{3}{x} - \log_{3}{5^2} = \log_{3}{(x + 1)} - \log_{3}{10^2} $$

$$ \log_{3}{x} - \log_{3}{25} = \log_{3}{(x + 1)} - \log_{3}{100} $$

$$ \log_{3}{\left(\frac{x}{25}\right)} = \log_{3}{\left(\frac{x + 1}{100}\right)}$$

$$ \frac{x}{25} = \frac{x + 1}{100} $$

$$ 100x = 25(x + 1) $$

$$ 100x = 25x + 25 $$

$$ 75x = 25 $$

$$ x = \frac{25}{75} $$

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{1}{3}} $$

---

$$ 3\left(\log_{7}{x} - \log_{7}{2}\right) = 2\log_{7}{4} $$

$$ 3\log_{7}{x} - 3\log_{7}{2} = 2\log_{7}{4} $$

$$ \log_{7}{x^3} - \log_{7}{2^3} = \log_{7}{4^2} $$

$$ \log_{7}{x^3} - \log_{7}{8} = \log_{7}{16} $$

$$ \log_{7}{\left(\frac{x^3}{8}\right)} = \log_{7}{16} $$

$$ \frac{x^3}{8} = 16 $$

$$ x^3 = 128 $$

$$ \sqrt[3]{x^3} = \sqrt[3]{128} $$

$$ \boxed{x = 4\sqrt[3]{2}} $$

---

**Preview of Next Section**

Let's take one of our previous exercises and look at it through a different
lense.

$$ \log_{3}{x} - 2\log_{3}{5} = \log_{3}{(x + 1)} - 2\log_{3}{10} $$

Now, in the next section we're going to be utilizing a method involving
exponentials that works in solving Logarithms all the time, but generally takes
a bit longer. Consider that this is an equation, we can always set all of our
terms on one side and equal to $0$. In the next section, we'll see some
logarithhms with terms that are not logarithms that will go here instead. Let's
do that with this example.

$$ \log_{3}{x} - 2\log_{3}{5} - \log_{3}{(x + 1)} + 2\log_{3}{10} = 0 $$

We can now combine our logarithms as always to make this one logarithm:

$$ \log_{3}{x} - \log_{3}{25} - \log_{3}{(x + 1)} + \log_{3}{100} = 0 $$

And now combine as covered in previous sections:

$$ \log_{3}{\left(\frac{x \cdot 100}{25 \cdot (x + 1)}\right)} = 0 $$

$$ \log_{3}{\left(\frac{100x}{25x + 25}\right)} = 0 $$

Now, recall this property of Logarithms from a previous section:

> If you ever have a Logarithhm where the _argument_ is $1$, that Logarithm will
> always equal $0$.
>
> $$ \log_{a}{1} = 0 $$

This means that we can set $0$ on the other side of our equation to:

$$ \log_{3}{\left(\frac{100x}{25x + 25}\right)} = \log_{3}{1} $$

Now, this constant is rather nice because it is a rule of Logarithms, in the
next section, we'll notice we'll have to actually figure out what $\log_{a}$
would have to have as it's argument to equal the constant on the other side of
the equation. Nevertheless, we can now solve this particular example:

$$ \frac{100x}{25x + 25} = 1 $$

And then we just end up solving this using Algebra as we did in the original
example.
