# Solving Logarithmic Equations with Exponentials (Precalculus - College Algebra 63)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jNUyVClUQfc)

---

As seen in the previous section, we can solve Logarithms with the same _base_ by
setting them equal to each other and then simply setting their arguments equal
to each other, then solving for the variable.

In this section, we're going to cover the cases where the Logarithms _don't_
have a common _base_, or if there is a non-logarithmic term in the equation.

We covered at the end of the last section the technique that will be explored in
this section in more depth. That being the technique of olving Logarithms Using
Exponentials.

---

The steps involved in Solving Logarithmic Equations Using Exponentials involves
the following:

1. Get all Logs on one side and the Constant on the other.

2. Combine the Logs

3. Use an Exponential (write in exponential form).

---

$$ \log{(x + 6)} = 1 $$

Recall that we can express logarithms as exponentials by separating them
accordingly. The above can be expressed as:

$$ 10^1 = x + 6 $$

$$ 10 = x + 6 $$

$$ x = 4 $$

As long as our answer does not cause any _Domain_ issues (_i.e._ our argument
$x + 6$ _cannot_ equal $0$ or be negative), then our solution is valid (you
should always confirm this by plugging our solution into our _original_ problem
statement).

---

$$ 3\log_{2}{(x - 1)} + \log_{2}{4} = 5 $$

Here we do have two Logs with the same base, but we also have a single term $5$.
This means we _cannot_ solve using the _Common Base_ technique explored in the
previous section. Instead we'll have to solve this by finding the _Exponential
Inverse_.

Let's start by combining our logs, since they have a common base, simplifying
the expression as:

$$ \log_{2}{(x - 1)^3} + \log_2{4} = 5 $$

$$ \log_{2}{\left((x - 1)^3 \cdot 4\right)} = 5 $$

$$ \log_{2}{\left(4(x - 1)^3 \right)} = 5 $$

$$ 2^5 = 4(x - 1)^3 $$

$$ 2^5 = 2^2(x - 1)^3 $$

$$ 2^3 = (x - 1)^3 $$

$$ 8 = (x - 1)^3 $$

$$ \sqrt[3]{8} = \sqrt[3]{(x - 1)^3} $$

$$ 2 = x - 1 $$

$$ \boxed{x = 3} $$

And of course, double check for _Domain_ issues. The only place where $x$ might
cause an issue is in the argument $x - 1$, but $3 - 1 = 2$ which is within the
acceptable _Domain_ range for Logarithms, and we are good to go.

---

$$ \log{(2x + 1)} = 1 + \log{(x - 2)} $$

$$ \log{(2x + 1)} - \log{(x - 2)} = 1 $$

$$ \log{\left(\frac{2x + 1}{x - 2}\right)} = 1 $$

$$ 10^1 = \frac{2x + 1}{x - 2} $$

$$ 10 = \frac{2x + 1}{x - 2} $$

$$ 10(x - 2) = 2x + 1 $$

$$ 10x - 20 = 2x + 1 $$

$$ 8x = 21 $$

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{21}{8}} $$

Now this is an awkward fraction to get at the end, but it's basically
$2\dfrac{5}{8}$. This when multiplied by $2$ and added to $1$ as is the case
with our first Log's argument definitely is greater than $0$, and when
subtracted by $2$ still yields a positive number for the second Log's argument,
so we know that this is a solution.

---

$$ \log_{6}{(x + 4)} = 1 - \log_{6}{(x + 3)} $$

$$ \log_{6}{(x + 4)} + \log_{6}{(x + 3)} = 1 $$

$$ \log_{6}{\left((x + 4) \cdot (x + 3) \right)} = 1 $$

$$ 6^1 = \left((x + 4) \cdot (x + 3) \right) $$

$$ 6 = (x + 4)(x + 3) $$

$$ 6 = x^2 + 7x + 12 $$

$$ x^2 + 7x + 6 = 0 $$

$$ (x + 6)(x + 1) = 0 $$

$$ x + 6 = 0 $$

$$ x = -6 $$

$$ x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ x = -1 $$

Here we have two solutions, and it is the first time we had to factor in order
to solve one of these. Let's double check each answer to be sure it doesn't plug
in a negative or $0$ to our Logs' arguments.

$$ x = -6 $$

$$ \log_{6}{((-6) + 4)} = 1 - \log_{6}{((-6) + 3)} $$

$$ \log_{6}{(-2)} = 1 - \log_{6}{(-3)} $$

Oop, we can't accept this answer, it returns a negative argument to our Logs and
is therefore not a defined solution.

$$ \cancel{x = -6} $$

What about the other answer?

$$ x = -1 $$

$$ \log_{6}{((-1) + 4)} = 1 - \log_{6}{((-1) + 3)} $$

$$ \log_{6}{(3)} = 1 - \log_{6}{(2)} $$

This is an acceptable solution as both arguments evaluate to a positive number.
Therefore our solution is:

$$ \boxed{x = -1} $$

---

$$ \log_{4}{(x^2 - 9)} - \log_{4}{(x + 3)} = 3 $$

$$ \log_{4}{\left(\frac{x^2 - 9}{x + 3}\right)} = 3 $$

$$ 4^3 = \frac{(x^2 - 9)}{(x + 3)} $$

$$ 64 = \frac{(x + 3)(x - 3)}{(x + 3)} $$

$$ 64 = \frac{\cancel{(x + 3)}(x - 3)}{\cancel{(x + 3)}} $$

$$ 64 = x - 3 $$

$$ x = 67 $$

$67^2 - 9$ is definitely larger than $0$, as is $67 + 3$, so this is a valid
solution.

$$ \boxed{x = 67} $$

---

$$ \ln{(x + 1)} - \ln{x} = 2 $$

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{x + 1}{x}\right)} = 2 $$

$$ \mathbf{e}^2 = \frac{x + 1}{x} $$

$$ x\mathbf{e}^2 = x + 1 $$

$$ x\mathbf{e}^2 - x = 1 $$

$$ x(\mathbf{e}^2 - 1) = 1 $$

$$ x = \frac{1}{\mathbf{e}^2 - 1} $$

Now this might look awkward, but we can still generally reason about it,
consider that $\mathbf{e} \approx 2.7$. When evaluated using a calculator, this
means that $x \approx 0.156$, and because this is positive, both of our Logs
arguments in our _Original Problem Statement_ are still valid.

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{1}{\mathbf{e}^2 - 1}} $$

---

Now the following three examples are going to be more difficult, this is because
they all use the _Change Of Base Formula For Logarithms_.

Recall this formula from a previous section:

$$ \log_{b}{a} = \frac{\log_{c}{a}}{\log_{c}{b}} $$

Consider a problem where you don't have a common base at all (this is unlike our
previous examples in which, even though we had a term to deal with, all our Logs
had the same _base_).

Consider this problem statement:

$$ \log_{9}{(7x - 5)} = \log_{3}{(x + 1)} $$

Here our Logs don't have the same base at at all, so we need a method for
solving this.

Let's consider the formula at the begining of this section, we can take any Log
of any base and change it into any log of any other base by following that
formula. Let's ignore the right hand side of our problem statement for a moment
and consider that the left hand can be transformed into an equivalent Log like
so:

$$ \log_{9}{(7x - 5)} \rightarrow \frac{\log_{3}{(7x - 5)}}{\log_{3}{9}}$$

Then consider that:

$$ \log_{3}{9} = 2 $$

So our equation, when the left hand side is evaluted this way, looks like:

$$ \frac{\log_{3}{(7x - 5)}}{2} = \log_{3}{(x + 1)} $$

And now we see something that looks familiar.

$$ \log_{3}{(7x - 5)} = 2\log_{3}{(x + 1)} $$

$$ \log_{3}{(7x - 5)} = \log_{3}{(x + 1)^2} $$

And we have Common Log now, we can simply set the arguments equivalent to each
other and solve for $x$:

$$ 7x - 5 = (x + 1)^2 $$

$$ 7x - 5 = (x + 1)(x + 1) $$

$$ 7x - 5 = x^2 + 2x + 1 $$

$$ x^2 - 5x + 6 = 0 $$

$$ (x - 3)(x - 2) = 0 $$

$$ x - 3 = 0 $$

$$ x = 3 $$

$$ x - 2 = 0 $$

$$ x = 2 $$

And again, we double check by plugging it into our original problem statement:

$$ \log_{9}{(7(3) - 5)} = \log_{3}{((3) + 1)} $$

These both yield positive numbers, so $x = 3$ is a valid solution.

$$ \log_{9}{(7(2) - 5)} = \log_{3}{((2) + 1)} $$

As is also the case for $x = 2$

$$ \boxed{x = 3} $$

$$ \boxed{x = 2} $$

---

$$ \log_{16}{x} + \log_{4}x + \log_{2}x = 7 $$

Okay, so we have a bit of everything here. When evaluating these, we're going to
want to choose a base that we can use as a Common Base, and then transform the
other logarithmic terms to have that same base. $\log_{2}$ looks to be akin to a
"lowest common denominator" sort of number that we can use, so let's convert our
other Log terms into that.

Starting with the first Log:

$$ \log_{16}{x} \rightarrow \frac{\log_{2}{x}}{\log_{2}{16}} \rightarrow \frac{\log_{2}{x}}{4}$$

And now the second Log:

$$ \log_{4}x \rightarrow \frac{\log_{2}{x}}{\log_{2}{4}} \rightarrow \frac{\log_{2}{x}}{2}  $$

And now we can rewrite our problem statement as:

$$ \frac{\log_{2}{x}}{4} + \frac{\log_{2}{x}}{2} + \log_{2}{x} = 7 $$

This looks difficult to reason about still, but we can also think of this as:

$$ \frac{1}{4}\log_{2}{x} + \frac{1}{2}\log_{2}{x} + \log_{2}{x} = 7 $$

And then we can apply the _Power Property Of Logarithms_ to express our equation
as:

$$ \log_{2}{x^{\frac{1}{4}}} + \log_{2}{x^{\frac{1}{2}}} + \log_{2}{x} = 7 $$

While we could express these as roots, let's simply multiply them now:

$$ \log_{2}{\left(x^{\frac{1}{4}} \cdot x^{\frac{1}{2}} \cdot x\right)} = 7 $$

And recall that when we multiply, we add exponents (this is why we didn't bother
expressing these a roots):

$$ \log_{2}{\left(x^{\frac{7}{4}} \right)} = 7 $$

And now write this as an exponent:

$$ 2^7 = x^{\frac{7}{4}} $$

Now, here we can go through the trouble of expressing this as root as well, but
if you think carefully, how can we simply get $x$? We'd have to somehow get
$x^1$. we can do that by raising both sides to the power of $\dfrac{4}{7}$:

$$ \left(2^7\right)^{\frac{4}{7}} = \left(x^{\frac{7}{4}}\right)^{\frac{4}{7}} $$

This equates to:

$$ 2^4 = x^1 $$

$$ 16 = x $$

$$ x = 16 $$

And because all of our arguments are simply $x$, $16$ is neither negative nor
$0$, and this is a valid solution:

$$ \boxed{x = 16} $$

---

$$ 2\left(\log_{4}{x}\right)^2 + 3\log_{8}{x} = \log_{2}{16} $$

This looks intimidating, and indeed it is. The most apparent thing about this is
that the _bases_ are all different, but we can indeed change them all to the
same base (heck, they're almost the same bases as the previous problem).

That said, one of the lowest hanging fruit to notice is that $\log_{2}{16}$ is
easily evaluated as $2^4 = 16$. Therefore this entire Log is just $4$.

But the $\log_{2}$ gets us thinking about our other two Logs. We can't just
simplify down to a $\log_{4}$ as $4$ to what power equals $8$? Well not any
easily found number off the top of our heads, but both of these Logs can be
expressed in the form of $\log_2$, so that is what we'll reach for when
expressing both of these.

$$ 2\left(\frac{\log_{2}{x}}{\log_{2}{4}}\right)^2 + 3\left(\frac{\log_{2}{x}}{\log_{2}{8}}\right) = \log_{2}{16} $$

Which when evaluated for the denominators equals:

$$ 2\left(\frac{\log_{2}{x}}{2}\right)^2 + 3\left(\frac{\log_{2}{x}}{3}\right) = \log_{2}{16} $$

What's nice is that the $3$'s cancel out:

$$ 2\left(\frac{\log_{2}{x}}{2}\right)^2 + \cancel{3}\left(\frac{\log_{2}{x}}{\cancel{3}}\right) = \log_{2}{16} $$

We also are going to apply the square here:

$$ \frac{2(\log_{2}{x})^2}{4} + \log_{2}{x} = \log_{2}{16} $$

And of course $\dfrac{2}{4}$ is $\dfrac{1}{2}$:

$$ \frac{(\log_{2}{x})^2}{2} + \log_{2}{x} = \log_{2}{16} $$

Now, don't break the order of operations. It's very easy to think that we can
simply do $\dfrac{1}{2}(\log_{2}{x})^2$ for our first term, but that would be
incorrect because we would be applying multiplication before exponents. But we
can multiply the entire equation by $2$:

$$ (\log_{2}{x})^2 + 2\log_{2}{x} = 2(4) $$

Notice that we finally changed the $\log_{2}{16}$ to $4$. We did this so as to
not further confusion as we proceed.

Because we have a square here, this can easily get complicated, but we might be
able to see that this is a quadratic if we use substitution:

$$ u = \log_{2}{x} $$

And then our equation becomes:

$$ u^2 + 2u = 8 $$

And then we solve for $u$:

$$ u^2 + 2u - 8 = 0 $$

$$ (u + 4)(u - 2) = 0 $$

$$ u = -4 $$

$$ u = 2 $$

And now we go back and remove our substitution to see what this really mean:

$$ \log_{2}{x} = -4 $$

$$ 2^{-4} = x $$

$$ \frac{1}{16} = x $$

$$ \log_{2}{x} = 2 $$

$$ 2^2 = x $$

$$ 4 = x $$

And because all our variable arguments to our Logs in our _Original Solution_,
both are valid solutions.

$$ \boxed{x = \frac{1}{16}} $$

$$ \boxed{x = 4} $$

---

Now, this last one might be more difficult, what if not only the bases are not
the same, but they aren't easily reduced down to a common base?

Consider the following problem statement:

$$ \log_{2}{x} = 3 - \log_{6}{x} $$

We can't find a common base here, $2$ to the power of what equals $6$ or some
exponential of $6$?

Nevertheless, solving this problem involves putting all the Log to one side and
all constants on the other, so let's do that:

$$ \log_{2}{x} + \log_{6}{x} = 3 $$

The trick here is to still apply our formula:

$$ \log_{b}{a} = \frac{\log_{c}{a}}{\log_{c}{b}} $$

But choose either the _Common Log_ or the _Natural Log_ and apply them to both
our Logs.

$$ \left(\frac{\ln{x}}{\ln{2}}\right) + \left(\frac{\ln{x}}{\ln{6}}\right) = 3 $$

This means we need an LCD in order to get this into one term:

$$ \left(\frac{\ln{6}}{\ln{6}}\right) \cdot \left(\frac{\ln{x}}{\ln{2}}\right) + \left(\frac{\ln{x}}{\ln{6}}\right) \cdot \left(\frac{\ln{2}}{\ln{2}}\right) = 3 $$

This equaltes to:

$$ \left(\frac{\ln{6} \cdot \ln{x}}{\ln{6} \cdot \ln{2}}\right) + \left(\frac{\ln{2} \cdot \ln{x}}{\ln{6} \cdot \ln{2}}\right) = 3 $$

Furthermore:

$$ \frac{(\ln{6} \cdot\ln{x}) + (\ln{2} \cdot \ln{x})}{\ln{6} \cdot \ln{2}} = 3 $$

Notice that $\ln{x}$ is a factor of both terms on the numerator:

$$ \frac{\ln{x}(\ln{6} + \ln{2})}{\ln{6} \cdot \ln{2}} = 3 $$

And recall that when we have two Logs of the same base added together, we can
combine these into a single Log with the product:

$$ \frac{\ln{x}(\ln{6 \cdot 2})}{\ln{6} \cdot \ln{2}} = 3 $$

$$ \frac{\ln{x} \cdot \ln{12}}{\ln{6} \cdot \ln{2}} = 3 $$

And here, we now are going to solve for $\ln{x}$:

$$ \ln{x} \cdot \ln{12} = 3(\ln{6} \cdot \ln{2}) $$

$$ \ln{x} = \frac{3(\ln{6} \cdot \ln{2})}{\ln{12}} $$

And now we express this as an exponential:

$$ \boxed{\mathbf{e}^{\frac{3(\ln{6} \cdot \ln{2})}{\ln{12}}} = x} $$

Obviously this is rather difficult to look at and it's not usual to come across
these in mathematical exercises, but it's still good to see how to solve
Logarithms when you can't easily find a Common Base.
