# Solving Exponential Equations with Logarithms (Precalculus - College Algebra 64)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rDcLCA2W-UI)

---

We have already solved Exponential Equations using Common Bases and Finding
Commmon Bases. But of course, much like we have covered in the previous section
on Logarithms, sometimes you simply cannot find a Common Base easily, and it is
better, in this case, to use Logarithms.

---

Consider the following example:

$$ 8 \cdot 3^{x + 1} = 5 $$

Here, we can't find a Common Base for any of our terms. There's no way to turn a
$5$ into a $3$ using some lower base to set our terms equal. In order to find
the value for $x$ in this case, we'll need to use Logarithms, as they are the
Inverse of Exponentials.

For now, we will solve only equations with a single exponential. When we get to
multi-exponential equations, we will have to pair down the techniques we use and
set separate Logarithms on opposite side of the $=$ sign.

Let's start simple though.

The basic rule for solving Exponential equations with Logarithms is to _Isolate
Exponential, and then Use Logarithms_. Consider the example from before:

$$ 8 \cdot 3^{x + 1} = 5 $$

Here, the $8$ prevents the exponential from being isolated. So let's divide both
sides by $8$ to start off with:

$$ 3^{(x + 1)} = \frac{5}{8} $$

Now this is isolated, we're not worried about the $x + 1$ as that is within the
exponent itself. But we can consider this isolated becase we only have the
single term exponent on one side of the equation.

There are multiple ways to solve this kind of equation, and we are goint to
cover each of them.

1. If you only have _one_ Exponential. We can go directly to Logarithmic
   Notation. Recall that we can separate out an Exponent using Logarithms, and
   rewrite them. We'll do just that here:

   $$ \log_{3}{\left(\frac{5}{8}\right)} = x + 1 $$

   $$ \boxed{\log_{3}{\left(\frac{5}{8}\right)} - 1 = x} $$

   Now, this is an _exact solution_. For all intents and purposes, we are done.
   We could get an _approximate solution_ by plugging this into a calculator. If
   your calculator is not capable of taking a specific log base, you can use the
   _Change of Base Formula_:

   $$ \log_{b}{a} = \frac{\log_{c}{a}}{\log_{c}{b}} $$

   To get a _Common Log_ or _Natural Log_ expression of this.

   To reiterate, note that this technique only works if you have _one_
   Logarithm. You cannot utilize this technique if you have _two_ Logarithms.

2. Let's stick with our original example, but let's say we don't want to go
   directly to Logarithmic Notation. As with all Equations, we can do whatever
   we'd like with this equation as long as we do it to both sides of the $=$
   sign.

   Consider that we can take a Logarithm of any base to solve these. In this
   section, we'll be using the _Common Log_. This has the benefit of not having
   to then use the _Change of Base Formula_ to approximate once we have solved
   for $x$.

   $$ 3^{(x + 1)} = \frac{5}{8} $$

   $$ \log{\left(3^{(x + 1)}\right)} = \log{\left(\frac{5}{8}\right)} $$

   Notice that we have an exponent on the inside of our Logarithm on the left!
   That means we can use the _Power Property_ to move the exponent as a
   Coefficient on the Logarithm:

   $$ (x + 1)\log{3} = \log{\left(\frac{5}{8}\right)} $$

   Because we don't have any other $x$'s in our equation, we don't necessarily
   have to distribute here (though we could and that would be fine, we could
   still solve this). Instead we can simply divide by $\log{3}$ and proceed to
   solve for $x$:

   $$ x + 1 = \frac{\log{\left(\dfrac{5}{8}\right)}}{\log{3}} $$

   $$ \boxed{x = \frac{\log{\left(\dfrac{5}{8}\right)}}{\log{3}} - 1} $$

3. Here we will start with the same example equation, but we're going to use the
   _Natural Log_. This is the most common way of solving Exponential Equations
   Using Logarithms you'll see, and you'll also notice it looks strikingly
   similar to our solution from the _Common Log_.

   $$ 3^{(x + 1)} = \frac{5}{8} $$

   $$ \ln{\left(3^{(x + 1)}\right)} = \ln{\left(\frac{5}{8}\right)} $$

   $$ (x + 1)\ln{3} = \ln{\left(\frac{5}{8}\right)} $$

   $$ x + 1 = \frac{\ln{\left(\dfrac{5}{8}\right)}}{\ln{3}} $$

   $$ \boxed{x = \frac{\ln{\left(\dfrac{5}{8}\right)}}{\ln{3}} - 1} $$

4. We already know that we can apply a Logarithm two both sides of our equation
   as long as they are the same Base. Consider if we took a Logarithm that had
   the same base as our argument. Consider the following:

   $$ 3^{(x + 1)} = \frac{5}{8} $$

   $$ \log_{3}{\left(3^{(x + 1)}\right)} = \log_{3}{\left(\frac{5}{8}\right)} $$

   Whether you simply know it off the top of your head or use the _Power
   Property_ to move the $(x + 1)$ up front, we know that a Log that has an
   Argument of the same base cancels out. This equates out to:

   $$ x + 1 = \log_{3}{\left(\frac{5}{8}\right)} $$

   $$ x = \log_{3}{\left(\frac{5}{8}\right)} - 1 $$

   Which is the same answer we got in the other examples. But like the first
   example, we'd have to use the _Change of Base_ formula to get something we
   could approximate on some calculators.

---

Now let's consider how we might Solve Exponential Equations Using Logarithms if
we have two different exponents to start with.

---

$$ 2^{x + 1} = 5^{1 - 2x} $$

Notice that we simply can't write this as one logarithm when we have two
different starting bases to our exponentials (that being of $2$ and $5$), they
simply don't go into each other in any way. Thusly the 1st and 4th techniques
covered in the previous section of this lecture will not work. We have to use
the _Common_ or _Natural_ Log techniques. Again, the most common choice is to
use the _Natural Log_.

$$ \ln{\left(2^{(x + 1)}\right)} = \ln{\left(5^{(1 - 2x)}\right)} $$

And now we can move our exponents to the front as coefficients:

$$ (x + 1)\ln{2} = (1 - 2x)\ln{5} $$

Here we have multiple terms with the variable we want to solve for here. So we
have to distribute. Don't just start dividing by factors here, it will become a
mess and less easy to reason about.

$$ x\ln{2} + \ln{2} = \ln{5} - 2x\ln{5} $$

Now group the $x$'s on one side, and anything else on the other side:

$$ x\ln{2} + 2x\ln{5} = \ln{5} - \ln{2} $$

And now we can factor out the $x$:

$$ x\left(\ln{2} + 2\ln{5}\right) = \ln{5} - \ln{2} $$

And, as always, just divide by the factor that doesn't include the $x$ to solve:

$$ x = \frac{\ln{5} - \ln{2}}{\ln{2} + 2\ln{5}} $$

Now, this is perfectly acceptable, but can we simplify it further? Consider that
we can combine logarithms that are either subtracted or added by converting them
into a single logarithm with the arguments divided or multiplied respectively:

$$ x = \frac{\ln{\left(\dfrac{5}{2}\right)}}{\ln{(2 \cdot 5^2)}} $$

Note that we moved the $2$ to square $5$ in order to get one Log on the
denominator:

$$ x = \frac{\ln{\left(\dfrac{5}{2}\right)}}{\ln{50}} $$

This is pretty good and more concise than our previous version of the answer
(though both are acceptable).

We can also take the $\ln{50}$ and express it as $\log_{50}{50}$ to get $1$ on
the denominator as long as we apply this log on the top as well. This would
result in:

$$ x = \log_{50}{\left(\frac{5}{2}\right)} $$

But then we have to use the _Change of Base_ for some calculators to get an
approximation, so this point might be moot, but nevertheless it helps you think
on the various ways you can express the same answer using Logarithms.

---

$$ \mathbf{e}^{x + 3} = \pi^x $$

This is obviously a candidate to use the _Natural Log_ on to solve:

$$ \ln{\left(\mathbf{e}^{(x + 3)}\right)} = \ln{\left(\pi^x \right)} $$

And in this case, the $\ln$ and $\mathbf{e}$ cancel leaving us just with the
exponential:

$$ x + 3 = \ln{\left(\pi^x\right)} $$

Now, notice we still have the $x$ in the power of our exponent on the right,
$\pi^x$. Let's move the exponent to the front as the Coeffcient as we have done
previously.

$$ x + 3 = x\ln{\pi} $$

Let's move our terms so that the $x$'s are on one side and our constants are on
the other.

$$ x - x\ln{\pi} = -3 $$

And we can now factor out $x$ and solve:

$$ x(1 - \ln{\pi})= -3 $$

$$ x = -\frac{3}{1 - \ln{\pi}} $$

We can't really simplify this any further or explore other forms of expression
as there is only one Log.

$$ \boxed{x = -\frac{3}{1 - \ln{\pi}}} $$

---

Let's up the difficulty a little bit:

$$ 2^{2x} + 2^{x + 2} - 12 = 0 $$

When we see these kinds of multi-term exponentials where the exponents are
different, we're usually going to use substitution, we just have to find a way,
in this case, to get the first two leading terms to be expressed as one
exponential instead of two. This requires some understanding of exponentials and
how they are both added and multiplied.

Consider that:

$$ 2^{2x} = \left(2^x\right)^2 $$

And also consider that:

$$ 2^{x + 2} = 2^x \cdot 2^2 $$

And this means we can rewrite our original equation as:

$$ \left(2^x\right)^2 + (2^x \cdot 2^2) - 12 = 0 $$

This becomes:

$$ \left(2^x\right)^2 + (2^x \cdot 4) - 12 = 0 $$

$$ \left(2^x\right)^2 + 4(2^x) - 12 = 0 $$

Now, should we distribute that $4$? Well no, we're trying to do substitution to
eventually solve for $x$. Instead let's declare a substitution variable:

$$ u = 2^x $$

This now changes our equation to:

$$ u^2 + 4u - 12 = 0 $$

And now we can solve for $u$:

$$ (u + 6)(u - 2) = 0 $$

$$ u = -6 $$

$$ u = 2 $$

And now we take these and undo our substitution:

$$ 2^x = -6 $$

$$ 2^x = 2 $$

And we can solve each of these individually.

Note that an exponential can't give us a solution that isn't positive, so our
first answer back from substitution is invalid.

$$ \cancel{2^x = -6} $$

Our second solution is rather simple actually:

$$ 2^x = 2^1 $$

And this has the Common Base $2$, and is easily solved using that method.
Resulting in:

$$ x = 1 $$

And if we plug it into our original problem statement, we see that this is
indeed correct:

$$ 2^{2(1)} + 2^{1 + 2} - 12 = 0 $$

$$ 2^2 + 2^3 - 12 = 0 $$

$$ 4 + 8 - 12 = 0 $$

$$ 12 - 12 = 0 $$

$$ 0 = 0 $$

And so this is a valid solution.

$$ \boxed{x = 1} $$
