# Review of Compound Interest (Precalculus - College Algebra 65)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N1k25doMFww)

---

We've covered Interest and Compound Interest in previous sections in both
Intermediate Algebra as well as in Paul's Math Notes on the subject.
Nevertheless, we're going to go over it again as a review as it does come up in
Precalculus exams and does exemplify a real world application of Algebraic
principles/concepts.

Additionally, in covering Interest/Compound Interest, hopefully you will notice
that when we talk about Interest, what we are referring to is an example of
_Exponential Growth_, and thusly is related to our previous sections.

---

**Compound Interest**

Compound Interest can be represented mathematically by the following equation:

$$ A = P\left(1 + \frac{r}{n} \right)^{n \cdot t} $$

The following list summarizes what each variable in this equation means:

- $A = \text{ Amount (Future Value)}$
- $P = \text{ Present Value (Principal)}$
- $r = \text{ Rate}$
- $t = \text{ Years}$

For $n$, we have to break this down into an additional list, as $n$ represents
the _Number Of Compounds in 1 year_.

- $n = \text{ Number Of Compounds in 1 year}$

Usually, when we encounter Problem Statements that involve Compound Interest, we
want to look for specific wording that represents the periodization of our
Compound to determine how we might calculate the number of Compounds, the
following table illustrates this:

| Period      | Compound ($n$) |
| ----------- | -------------- |
| Annual      | 1              |
| Semi-Annual | 2              |
| Quarterly   | 4              |
| Monthly     | 12             |
| Weekly      | 52             |
| Daily       | 365            |

---

**Continuously Compounded Interest**

Compound Interest can be Compounded _Continuously_, meaning that there is no set
number of compounds at which our Principle accumulates interest. Instead, it
compounds continuously (every moment, _i.e._ every infinitesimally small unit of
time). This continuous accumulation of interest is represented by the following
formula, in which you should take note the use of _Euler's Constant_:

$$ A = P\mathbf{e}^{r \cdot t} $$

We use $\mathbf{e}$ because we cannot represent an infinity when calculating the
amount of moments. In truth, we can represent continuous interest as such:

$$ \left(1 + \frac{1}{n}\right)^n $$

But as $n$ continuously gets larger and larger and larger, it eventually
continues to approach $\mathbf{e}$. We will find this out in Calculus I. You can
get a sneak peak of the proof for this here:

$$ \lim_{n \to \infty}\left(1 + \frac{r}{n}\right)^{nt} = \mathbf{e}^{rt} $$

And an explanation of the above
[here](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/2362623/why-is-e-eulers-constant-included-in-the-formula-for-continuous-interest).

---

**Examples**

---

$3,000 Is Invested at 9.25%, Compounded Monthly for $2\frac{1}{2}$ Years. What
is the amount of money we will end up with after $2\frac{1}{2}$ Years?

Let's break down what we're trying to solve for, and what represents thta in our
equation. In this case, we are trying to find our Future Value, which in our
Compound Interest Formula, is represnted by $A$.

The $3000 is our Principal Amount, represented by $P$. The 9.25% is the rate at
which our interest compounds, and we always write this in decimal form. The
word, "Monthly", indicates the amount of Compounds per year we would have, which
means that $n$ has the value of $12$. And $2\frac{1}{2}$ years is our time, and
we would write that as a decimal, $2.5$. With this we have the variables
necessary to plug into our Compound Interest Formula:

$$ A = 3000\left(1 + \frac{0.0925}{12}\right)^{(12 \cdot 2.5)} $$

Now, for nearly all Compound Interest problems, we will need to use a
calculator. Do _not_ do this in multiple steps on your calculator, as this will
not give us an accurate approximation, as each step will give us an
approximation instead of an exact answer, and each step will further "dilute"
our answer, making it less and less accurate with each step.

If we plug the above into a calculator, we get:

$$ A \approx 3777.17 $$

And therefore our future value, $A$, is approximately $3777.17.

---

Okay, so what if we had the same Problem statement above, but instead our
interest was compounded _Continuously_?

> $3,000 Is Invested at 9.25%, Compounded _Continuously_ for $2\frac{1}{2}$
> Years. What is the amount of money we will end up with after $2\frac{1}{2}$
> Years?

The same numbers would be used, but we would use our other formula:

$$ A = P\mathbf{e}^{r \cdot t} $$

$$ A = 3000\mathbf{e}^{(0.0925 \cdot 2.5)} $$

$$ A \approx \$3780.52 $$

Note that despite compounding continuously, are Future Value isn't all that much
more than Compounding Interest at any other finite number of compounds.
Compounding continuously will always make you more money than compounding
finitely, but the amount gained is not as significant as one might think. What
influences the amount of money accrued moreso than the number of compounds is
the _rate_ primarily, and then _time_.

---

Let's reword our problem statements a bit. Consider the following:

How much should be invested at 8.5%, compounded _Daily_ to earn $800 in
$3\frac{1}{4}$ years?

This is slightly different, as the Future Amount, $A$, is given to us ($800),
but the Principal Value, $P$, is what we are being asked to calculate.

Much like our previous problem, we'll want to determine what each of our
variables are to solve this problem.

$$
\begin{align*}
r = 0.085 \\
n = 365 \\
A = 800 \\
t = 3.25 \\
P = \text{ ?} \\
\end{align*}
$$

And now we get the equation:

$$ 800 = P\left(1 + \frac{0.085}{365}\right)^{(365 \cdot 3.25)} $$

Now we just have to isolate $P$ to determine the formula we'll need to plug into
our calculator. Don't try to overcomplicate this step, simply dividing both
sides of the equation by the exponential term on the right hand side will yield
our formula:

$$ P = \frac{800}{\left[\left(1 + \dfrac{0.085}{365}\right)^{(365 \cdot 3.25)}\right]} $$

$$ P \approx \$606.92 $$

If we were asked, what was the Interest Earned, we could simply subtract $P$
from $A$, and that would be our _Interest_.

---

If we were asked the same question above, but asked to calculate it with
Intersest _Compounded Continuously_, then we could express that as:

$$ 800 = P\mathbf{e}^{(0.085 \cdot 3.25)} $$

$$ P = \frac{800}{\mathbf{e}^{(0.085 \cdot 3.25)}} $$

$$ P \approx \$606.90 $$

Note that our Principal Investment is lower when interest is Compounded
Continuously, this is because we need less money to get to our target goal of
$800 when we are Compounding Interest at a continous rate.

---

Consider the following Problem Statement:

> How long does it take to double an investment at 4.5% compounded quarterly?

Note that we don't provide the initial investment, that's because it doesn't
matter, we are simply asking, how much _time_ will it take to double _any_
investment. In other words, we are solving for the variable $t$.

Let's fill in our values:

$$
\begin{align*}
P = \text{ ?} \\
A = 2P \\
n = 4 \\
r = 0.045 \\
t = \text{ ?} \\
\end{align*}
$$

Now, you might still be confused as to how to fill in this formula. Consider
what happens when we fill this in:

$$ 2P = P\left(1 + \frac{0.045}{4}\right)^{(4 \cdot t)} $$

Now, we're eventually going to need a Logarithm to solve for $t$, but consider
that we have to isolate our exponential term first by dividing by $P$:

$$ \frac{2P}{P} = \left(1 + \frac{0.045}{4}\right)^{(4 \cdot t)} $$

$$ 2 = \left(1 + \frac{0.045}{4}\right)^{(4 \cdot t)} $$

Our principle value variable is canceled out. We only are trying to evaluate for
time, and the amount we started with doesn't matter, only the multiple of our
principle matters (doubling our investment, $2$ is what matters).

Let's take a look at what we're left with:

$$ 2 = \left(1 + \frac{0.045}{4}\right)^{4t} $$

Now we need logarithms to solve this. We oftentimes will reach for the _Natural
Logarithm_, so let's do just that:

$$ \ln{2} = \ln{\left(1 + \frac{0.045}{4}\right)^{4t}} $$

We can now move our exponent as a coefficient thanks to the _Power Property_ of
Logarithms:

$$ \ln{2} = 4t \ln{\left(1 + \frac{0.045}{4}\right)} $$

We can then just use division to isolate $t$ for the formula we can plug into
our calculator:

$$ t = \frac{\ln{(2)}}{\left[4\ln\left(1 + \dfrac{0.045}{4}\right)\right]} $$

The parentheses in the above are added in order to ensure that when plugged into
the calculator, we are explicity about the operations we are doing when
performing this calculation.

$$ t \approx 15.49 \text{ years} $$

---

Let's quickly calculate the same if it were compounded _Continuously_.

> How long does it take to double an investment at 4.5% compounded continuously?

$$
\begin{align*}
P = \text{ ?} \\
A = 2P \\
r = 0.045 \\
t = \text{ ?} \\
\end{align*}
$$

$$ 2P = P\mathbf{e}^{(0.045 \cdot t)} $$

$$ 2 = \mathbf{e}^{0.045t} $$

Hopefully, it's obvious that using the _Natural Logarithm_ is very nice for this
equation.

$$ \ln{2} = \ln{\mathbf{e}^{0.045t}} $$

$$ \ln{2} = 0.045t\ln{\mathbf{e}} $$

And $\ln{e}$ is equal to $1$, it essentially cancels out.

$$ \ln{2} = 0.045t $$

$$ t = \frac{\ln{(2)}}{0.045} $$

$$ t \approx 15.40 \text{ years} $$

---

**Effective Rate**

Determining Effective Rate is essentially stripping down our Compound Interest
and Continuously Compounded Interest Formulas of their Final Amount $A$ and the
Principal Amount $P$ to determine the Effective Rate of interest over the course
of $1$ year.

Essentially, you are always accumulating a bit more value (_i.e._ money
owed/earned) and that amount is the new value that is being used to calculate
the amount returned. If we want to determine the Effective Rate, or the overall
rate of return, then we need to use the following formulas to determine that.
Again, these formulas should look familiar to you as they are based off of the
Compound Interest formulas we talked at length about above.

$$ r_e = \left(1 + \frac{r}{n} \right)^n - 1 $$

And for continously compounded interest, we can determine the _Effective Rate_
with:

$$ r_e = e^r - 1 $$

---

**Examples**

---

> Find The _Effective Rate_ for 9.75% compounded monthly.

$$ r_e = \left(1 + \frac{0.0975}{12}\right)^{12} - 1 $$

$$ r_e \approx 0.102 $$

$$ r_e \approx 10.2\% $$

In essence, we are determining the _overall_ percent interest we will earn from
any initial investment that compounds _Monthly_ at a _Nominal Rate_ of 9.75%.

---

For continously compouned, the formula is slightly easier:

$$ r_e = \mathbf{e}^{0.0975} - 1 $$

$$ r_e \approx 0.1024 $$

$$ r_e \approx 10.24\% $$
