# Exponential Growth and Decay (Precalculus - College Algebra 66)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rO-C48LY2KY)

---

The formula for determining Exponential Growth/Decay utilizes a formula that is
essentially the same as the formula for determining Continuously Compounded
Interest, which we covered in the previous section.

In this section, we're going to cover a brief introduction to something called
Differential Equations, which will be a topic covered in far more depth in
Calculus 1.

---

You can think of calculating Exponential Growth/Decay to be a formula for
determining the rate of growth or shrinking of a particular value, such as
determining the rate at which bacteria reproduce, or the rate at which
radioactivity decays over time.

The general formula looks like this:

$$ A(t) = A_0\mathbf{e}^{k \cdot t} $$

Where $A(t)$ represents the amount after $t$ time. $A_0$ is our principal value,
our initial value. We recognize $\mathbf{e}$, Euler's Number, as representing
continuous rate of growth at an infinitisimally small unit of time. $k$
represents the _rate_, and $t$ represents a period of time.

$$
\begin{align*}
A(t) = \text{ Amount after } t \text{ time} \\
A_0 = \text{ Initial Amount} \\
t = \text{ a time period} \\
k = \text{ the rate} \\
\end{align*}
$$

Now, how do we know if we are determining an amount after Exponential Growth or
after Exponential Decay? Well, this is determined by the rate, $k$. As $k$ it is
an exponential, this means that our amount over time $A(t)$ will _grow_ if
$k > 0$, and will _decrease_ if $k < 0$.

$$
\begin{align*}
k > 0 \text{ ... growth} \\
k < 0 \text{ ... decay} \\
\end{align*}
$$

To illustrate using our formula, consider this:

$$ A(t) = A_0\mathbf{e}^{k \cdot t} $$

All well in good, but let's say that $k$ is negative:

$$ A(t) = A_0\mathbf{e}^{-k \cdot t} $$

This is equivalent to:

$$ A(t) = A_0\left(\frac{1}{\mathbf{e}}\right)^{k \cdot t}$$

Essentially this creates a graph that continually gets closer and closer to $0$
as time $t$ approaches infinity.

---

A basic example:

$$ C(t) = 100\mathbf{e}^{0.045t} $$

Answer the following:

Growth Of Decay?: Growth (0.045 > 0) (4.5% growth per time period (_i.e._ hour,
minute, etc.))

Initial Amount?: 100 units (...bacteria, grams, etc.)

Amount after 5 hours?: (always be sure this matches the time period units)

$$ C(5) = 100\mathbf{e}^{(0.045 \cdot 5)}  $$

$$ C(5) \approx 125.2 \text{ units} $$

How long to reach 140?:

$$ 140 = 100\mathbf{e}^{0.045t} $$

$$ \frac{140}{100} = \mathbf{e}^{0.045t} $$

$$ 1.4 = \mathbf{e}^{0.045t} $$

$$ \ln{1.4} = \ln{\mathbf{e}^{0.045t}} $$

$$ \ln{1.4} = 0.045t $$

$$ t = \frac{\ln{1.4}}{0.045} $$

$$ t \approx 7.48 \text{ hours} $$

How Long to double?:

$$ 200 = 100\mathbf{e}^{0.045t} $$

$$ 2 = \mathbf{e}^{0.045t} $$

$$ \ln{2} = 0.045t $$

$$ t = \frac{\ln{2}}{0.045} $$

$$ t \approx 15.40 \text{ hours} $$

---

**Examples**

---

Find a formula for a population of bacteria that doubles every 3 hours.

$$ A(t) = A_0\mathbf{e}^{k \cdot t} $$

$$ 2 = \mathbf{e}^{k \cdot 3} $$

$$ 2 = \mathbf{e}^{3k} $$

$$ \ln{2} = 3k $$

$$ k = \frac{\ln{(2)}}{3} $$

$$ k \approx 0.231 $$

$$ k \approx 23.1\% \text{ per hour} $$

Usually you would give an exact answer for something like this, as we are trying
to get a very exact solution when determining things like exponential
growth/decay.

Now we can write our final formula as:

$$ A(t) = A_0\mathbf{e}^{0.231t} $$

And now that we have the rate, we can use this formula to determine how much
time it would take to get a certain amount of units. Let's say we wanted to find
out how long, at this rate, it would be to triple the amount of units, we could
start this off by plugging in the appropriate values and solving:

$$ 3 = 1\mathbf{e}^{0.231t} $$

$$ 3 = \mathbf{e}^{0.231t} $$

$$ \ln{3} = 0.231t $$

$$ t = \frac{\ln{3}}{0.231} $$

$$ t \approx 4.76 \text{ hours} $$

---

**Half-Life**

> Half-Life of Radium is 1690 years. If 20g are present now, how much will be
> there in 50 years?

Half-Life is an example of Exponential Decay. As elements express Radioactive
Decay, it loses a lot of radiation at first, but as it continues to lose more
and more radiation, it has less radiation to lose, and thusly the nominal rate
of decay decreases more and more. This means that as time approaches infinity,
the amount of the element continues to get closer and closer to $0$, but never
actually reaches it (a Horizontal Asymptote on a graph would be the visual
representation of this).

Let's start with our function:

$$ A(t) = A_0\mathbf{e}^{k \cdot  t} $$

What Half-Life means is that there will be _half_ of _what you start with_ after
a _certain amount of time_.

Our initial value is $20\text{g}$. We can therefore plug that in for $A_0$.

$$ A(t) = 20\mathbf{e}^{k \cdot  t} $$

What a half life says is that there will be half of $A_0$ after $t$ time.

$$ 10 = 20\mathbf{e}^{k \cdot 1690} $$

And we are solving for $k$ to eventually use in finding our final answer.

$$ \frac{1}{2} = \mathbf{e}^{k \cdot 1690} $$

Note that we get $\dfrac{1}{2}$ on the left hand side, this is the expression
for _Half-Life_. In other words, we could have not been provided the initial
value of $20$. As long as we are provided the amount for $t$, we can find the
formula that will solve for $k$.

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)} = 1690k $$

$$ k = \frac{\ln{\left(\dfrac{1}{2}\right)}}{1690} $$

$$ k \approx -0.00041 $$

Note that any time we take a logarithm of a fraction that we will get a negative
number, as covered in our previous sections on logarithms.

We can now plug this into our formula:

$$ A(t) = \mathbf{e}^{-0.00041t} $$

Now, this is where the initial amount (20), is needed to determine the exact
amount of radium will be present in 50 years.

$$ A(t) = 20\mathbf{e}^{-0.00041(50)} $$

$$ A(t) \approx 19.59 \text{g} $$

---

> C-14 has a _Half-Life_ of 5730 years. If a Dead Tree has 30% of the C-14 it
> originally did, when did the tree die?

$$ A(t) = A_0\mathbf{e}^{k \cdot t} $$

The first sentence of our problem statement gives us enough to determine our
rate, $k$:

$$ \frac{1}{2} = \mathbf{e}^{5730k} $$

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)} = 5730k $$

$$ k = \frac{\ln{\left(\dfrac{1}{2}\right)}}{5730} $$

$$ k \approx -0.000121 $$

We can now use $k$, the rate of decrease, and plug it in to determine our
answer.

$$ A(t) = A_0\mathbf{e}^{-0.000121t} $$

Now, the second sentence of our Problem statement is somewhat confusing, because
we don't have an initial amount of C-14, but we don't need it. Consider the
following:

$$ 0.3 = 1\mathbf{e}^{-0.000121t} $$

$$ 0.3 = \mathbf{e}^{-0.000121t} $$

It doesn't matter that we don't have an initial amount, because we know that the
tree only has 30% of its original value left. This means that if we have $1$ as
our original value $A_0$, then that means that we are left with $0.3$ for
$A(t)$.

We can now solve for $t$, the time it took for the tree to die (when it had 30%
of the original C-14):

$$ 0.3 = \mathbf{e}^{-0.000121t} $$

$$ \ln{0.3} = -0.000121t $$

$$ t = \frac{\ln{0.3}}{-0.000121} $$

$$ t \approx 9950.2 \text{ years} $$

Note that this answer is probably quite a bit off due to the approximation of
$k$.

---

**Newton's Law of Cooling**

Newton's Law of Cooling essentially asks "How Long is it going to take for
something that is a different temperature to the ambient, to reach a certain
temperature?"

Consider the following statement:

> A turkey comes out of the oven at $100\degree\text{C}$ and is
> $80\degree\text{C}$ in $5$ minutes. When will it be $50\degree\text{C}$ so
> that I won't burn my fingers when I cut it? I keep my house at
> $30\degree\text{C}$.

Newton's Law Of Cooling can help us solve this problem. The formula looks like
this:

$$ U(t) = T + (U_0 - T)\mathbf{e}^{k \cdot t} $$

And here are what each of these variables represent:

$$
\begin{align*}
T = \text{ Ambient Temperature} \\
U_0 = \text{ Initial Temperature} \\
U(t) = \text{ Temperature after } t \text{ time} \\
k = \text{ rate of cooling} \\
t = \text{ time to cool}
\end{align*}
$$

Based off of this understanding of the formula's variables, and what they
represent, we can then plug in some numbers from our problem statement:

$$
\begin{align*}
T = 30 \\
U(t) = 50 \\
U_0 = 100 \\
k = ?
t = 5
\end{align*}
$$

We can first solve for $k$:

$$ 80 = 30 + (100 - 30)\mathbf{e}^{k \cdot 5}$$

$$ 80 = 30 + 70\mathbf{e}^{5k}$$

$$ 50 = 70\mathbf{e}^{5k}$$

$$ \frac{5}{7} = \mathbf{e}^{5k} $$

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{5}{7}\right)} = 5k $$

$$ k = \frac{\ln{\left(\dfrac{5}{7}\right)}}{5} $$

$$ k \approx -0.067294 $$

Then we can solve our problem by plugging in $k$ and solving for $t$:

$$ 50 = 30 + (100 - 30)\mathbf{e}^{-0.067294 \cdot t} $$

$$ 50 = 30 + 70\mathbf{e}^{-0.067294t} $$

$$ 20 = 70\mathbf{e}^{-0.067294t} $$

$$ \frac{2}{7}= \mathbf{e}^{-0.067294t} $$

$$ \ln{\left(\frac{2}{7}\right)} =-0.067294t $$

$$ t = \frac{\ln{\left(\dfrac{2}{7}\right)}}{-0.067294} $$

$$ t \approx 19.90 \text{ minutes} $$
