# Introduction to Series and Summation Notation (Precalculus - College Algebra 68)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ipz9xXeoaRc)

---

We have already talked a bit on the topic of Sequences. This hopefully has
prepared you well for now covering the topic of Series, which, in essence, is
just adding up the terms of a Sequence.

This, in turn, will set us up for more advanced topics utilized within Calculus
2, and we will be touching on some of them in the upcoming lectures.

The general notation for sequences looks like this:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{\frac{k^2}{2}} = $$

The greek letter, $\sum$, pronounced "Sigma", stands for a _sum_. The sequence
follows it to the right, $\dfrac{k^2}{2}$ The expression on the bottom of the
Sigma character, $k = 1$ tells us where to _start_ the sequence, where the
number on top of the Sigma character, $n$, tells us where to _end_ the sequence.

In essence, start by plugging in $k = 1$ into $\dfrac{k^2}{2}$, and then keep
incrementing $k$:

$$ \frac{1^2}{2} + \frac{2^2}{2} + \frac{3^2}{2} + \text{ ... } \frac{n^2}{2} $$

Notice that $k$ represents the _index_ of our sequence, and $n$ tells us the
index at which to stop. If we had been given $3$ instead of $n$ in our original
series statement:

$$ \sum^{3}_{k = 1}{\frac{k^2}{2}} = $$

Then our series would have stopped at $3$:

$$ \frac{1^2}{2} + \frac{2^2}{2} + \frac{3^2}{2} $$

Of course, as $n$ continues to grow, this process becomes tedious as adding up
an unknown amount of numbers one by one is time consuming and error prone.
Luckily, of course, like many other topics in mathematics, there are formulas
for this, and we will address that in the upcoming sections.

---

$$ \sum^{n - 1}_{k = 0}{(2k + 1)} =  $$

$$ \left(2(0) + 1\right) + \left(2(1) + 1\right) + \left(2(2) + 1\right) + \left(2(3) + 1\right) \text{ ... } \left(2(n - 1) + 1\right) $$

Which simplifies to:

$$ \left(2(0) + 1\right) + \left(2(1) + 1\right) + \left(2(2) + 1\right) + \left(2(3) + 1\right) \text{ ... } \left(2n - 1\right) $$

And this is a formula for simply outputting odd numbers.

Note that this simplification for the final output indicates that we can
manipulate one series into another by changing the starting index $k$. In this
case changing $k$ to $1$ outputs the same series.

$$ \sum^{n - 1}_{k = 1}{(2k + 1)} $$

---

**Building A Series From a Sum**

We can also go backwards, suppose you are given a series expression like so:

$$ 2 - 4 + 8 - \text{ ... } -256 $$

Similar to determining functions from sequences, we can go backwards through
this by first simply listing out our first few terms:

$$
\begin{align*}
a_1 = 2 \\
a_2 = -4 \\
a_3 = 8 \\
\text{ ... } \\
a_k = -256 \\
\end{align*}
$$

Think on the logic of this sequence, the next term, $a_4$ would be $-16$. It is
alternating sign, and doubling each iteration. We want to find a common form,
and then find what isn't changing, and then what is changing to determine the
series expression.

Notice also that this series does have a definitive stopping point at $-256$, so
we're going to have to figure out at what index this series stops as well.

$$
\begin{align*}
a_1 = 2 \rightarrow 1 \cdot 2 \\
a_2 = -4 \rightarrow -1 \cdot 4 \\
a_3 = 8 \rightarrow 1 \cdot 8 \\
\end{align*}
$$

Note that while the terms might be multiples of $2$, they don't simply multiply
by $2$, instead, they are taken from powers of $2$.

$$
\begin{align*}
a_1 = 2 \rightarrow 1 \cdot 2 \rightarrow 1 \cdot 2^1 \\
a_2 = -4 \rightarrow -1 \cdot 4 \rightarrow -1 \cdot 2^2 \\
a_3 = 8 \rightarrow 1 \cdot 8 \rightarrow 1 \cdot 2^3 \\
\end{align*}
$$

And the negative can also be determined by the index by simply logically
stepping through a sample input. In doing so, we determine that the exponent can
be related to the index by subtracting $1$ from it, and changing all the bases
to $-1$.

$$
\begin{align*}
a_1 = 2 \rightarrow 1 \cdot 2 \rightarrow 1 \cdot 2^1 \rightarrow (-1)^{(1) - 1} \cdot 2^1 \\
a_2 = -4 \rightarrow -1 \cdot 4 \rightarrow -1 \cdot 2^2 \rightarrow (-1)^{(2) - 1} \cdot 2^2 \\
a_3 = 8 \rightarrow 1 \cdot 8 \rightarrow 1 \cdot 2^3 \rightarrow (-1)^{(3) - 1} \cdot 2^3 \\
\end{align*}
$$

So for our final term, we can determine what the last index is by following the
above same form:

$$ a_k = -256 \rightarrow -1 \cdot 256 \rightarrow (-1)^{8 - 1} \cdot 2^8 $$

Thusly the last index in our series is $8$. And we can write out our series like
so:

$$ \sum^{8}_{k = 1}{\left((-1)^{k - 1} \cdot 2^k\right)} $$

---

## Formulas

Okay, so how do we calculate the sum of these series. Unlike before, we don't
want to actually write out every iteration of our series, as again, that is very
tedious. So instead we write out our series as Formulas that are provable via
something called "Mathematical Induction".

Let's first take the classic Gaussean Formula for summing any series of numbers:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{k} = \frac{n(n + 1)}{2} $$

Notice that we scarcely care about where we start here as $k$ is not in the
final formula. Instead, we simply input the last index, $n$ into our formula and
this will give us the sum of every number in the series.

You can test it, if you plug in $10$ for $n$, we'll get the sum of $1 + 2 + 3 +
4 + 5 + \text{ ... } + 10$, which is $55$.

Now, we will prove this later in a future lecture on proofs by Mathematical
Induction.

What if we don't just want to count, but would rather square, or cube our input?
We have further formulas for those as well:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{k^2} = \frac{n(n + 1)(2n + 1)}{6} $$

The above formula will give you the sum of $1^2 + 2^2 + 3^2 \text{ ... } k^2$.

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{k^3} = \left[\frac{n(n + 1)}{2}\right]^2 $$

And yes, the above formula will give you the sum of
$1^3 + 2^3 + 3^3 \text{ ... } k^3$.

Note that there are other formulas out there for finding a series, but these are
the most common ones.

Note that if we have no idea what $n$ is, we have an _infinite_ series, and this
concept leads into aspects of a future topic, Geometric Series.

Now consider a slightly more difficult formula:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{C} = C \cdot n $$

First and foremost, simply think of this as being the same expression as:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{1} = 1 \cdot n $$

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{1} = n $$

This is because if we have a constant as the function, nothing happens, we
simply add up the constant $1$ $n$ times. If we replaced $n$ with $7$ in our
series expression:

$$ \sum^{7}_{k = 1}{1} $$

This would look like iteration by iteration as: $1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1$

If we changed the constant to $5$, it would be:

$$ \sum^{7}_{k = 1}{5} $$

And this would be in iterative form: $5 + 5 + 5 + 5 + 5 + 5 + 5$.

$$ \sum^{7}_{k = 1}{5} = 5 \cdot 7 = 35 $$

Let's now return to our first expression of this:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{C} = C \cdot n $$

Hopefully now you can see that $C$ stands for some constant number, that is
simply added up $n$ times.

Note that the series summation is just representative of some number, and thusly
we can move it around using the standard arithmetic rules as any number.

Consider this:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{C} = \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{C \cdot 1} = C\sum^{n}_{k = 1}1 $$

---

Let's now take a more complicated example:

$$ \sum^{12}_{k = 1}(k^3 - 4k^2 + 5k + 7) $$

This may seem insurmountable, but keep in mind that we can simply break up our
series into multiple series via factoring like any other number. This means that
we can express this series into forms that resemble the formulas we covered in
the previous section.

$$ \sum^{12}_{k = 1}k^3 - \sum^{12}_{k = 1}4k^2 + \sum^{12}_{k = 1}5k + \sum^{12}_{k = 1}7 $$

We now want to ensure each term conforms to the format of our formulas. The
first term here, $\sum^{12}_{k = 1}k^3$ conforms perfectly to our cubed formula
for series. We can simply plug in what we need to find the actual number this
equals.

Now, the others, have factorable terms, as covered in our formula that included
a constant $C$. We can therefore rewrite our summation of series like so:

$$ \sum^{12}_{k = 1}k^3 - 4\sum^{12}_{k = 1}k^2 + 5\sum^{12}_{k = 1}k + 7\sum^{12}_{k = 1}1 $$

The last term didn't need to be expressed that way, but it means the same thing
($7 \cdot 12$).

Now we take our formulas and plug them in:

$$ \left[\frac{(12)(12 + 1)}{2}\right]^2 - 4\left[\frac{(12)(12 + 1)(2(12) + 1)}{6}\right] + 5\left[\frac{(12)(12 + 1)}{2}\right] + (7 \cdot 12) $$

Now, from here you can use your calculator, simplify, etc. Whatever gets you
your answer. Do not, that very much like sequences, series _cannot_ return
negative numbers, fractions, nor decimals.

Once we add all this up we get:

$$ \sum^{12}_{k = 1}(k^3 - 4k^2 + 5k + 7) = 3958 $$

---

**Noncomforming Series**

So what happens when your starting index isn't $1$, but otherwise conforms to
one of our known series formulas?

$$ \sum^{24}_{k = 4}k^3 $$

We don't want the first $3$ terms of our usual $\sum^{n}_{k = 1}{k^3}$ formula.
So what do we do? We could subtract the sum of the first three terms:

$$ \sum^{24}_{k = 4}k^3 \rightarrow \sum^{24}_{k = 1}k^3 - \sum^{3}_{k = 1}k^3 $$

First we simply calculate the whole series, and then subtract the series up to
the $3$<sup>rd</sup> term.
