# Arithmetic Sequences (Precalculus - College Algebra 69)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bxGmjouB6t4)

---

Let's now address some very common and useful sequences that are utilized in
later topics of Mathematics. Over the course of the next four lectures, we are
going to discuss Arithmetic Sequences/Series, and Geometric Sequences/Series.

---

An _Arithmetic Sequence_ is a _Sequence_ where the _Difference_ between any $2$
_Sequential_ Terms is _Constant_. This _Constant_ is known as "The Common
Difference", often denoted with the letter, $d$. Essentially this means that you
are adding the same number over and over again.

Consider the following sequence:

$$ 2, 6, 10, 14, 18, \text{ ... } $$

The _Common Difference_ between all these numbers is $4$.

Now, this is all well and good, but what if we wanted to find the
100<sup>th</sup> term in this sequence without simply adding $4$ over and over
to the last term? We'll need a formula, and luckily for us, there is one.

_Arithmetic Sequences_ can _always_ be written as:

$$ a_n = a_1 + (n - 1)d $$

Where $a_1$ is our starting term, and $n - 1$ is representative of how many
differences we'll need to add. The reason it's $n - 1$ and not $n$ is because
including $a_1$ in our formula essentially already counts the value of this
term, we've essentially "burned up" $1$ of our terms.

From our sequence above, we can gather these terms:

$$
\begin{align*}
a_1 = 2 \\
d = 4 \\
\end{align*}
$$

And we can plug these values into our _Arithmetic Sequence_ formula:

$$ a_n = 2 + (n - 1)(4) $$

And simplify it:

$$ a_n = 2 + 4n - 4 $$

$$ a_n = 4n - 2 $$

And now, we can simply plug in any number for $n$. We said we didn't want to
calculate our 100<sup>th</sup> term from before due to the tedious nature of
calculating it, but thanks to the _Arithmetic Sequence_ Formula, we can easily
do so now:

$$ a_{100} = 4(100) -  2 $$

$$ a_{100} = 400 - 2 $$

$$ a_{100} = 398 $$

Now, don't confuse this with a _Series_, this is not. We have only found the
100<sup>th</sup> term in a _Sequence_ here.

---

Consider the following problem statement:

> The 8<sup>th</sup> term of an _Arithmetic Sequence_ is $75$. The
> 20<sup>th</sup> is $39$. Find the Formula and the 12<sup>th</sup> term.

$$ a_n = a_1 + (n - 1)d $$

Note from the problem statement that the 20<sup>th</sup> term is less than the
8<sup>th</sup> term. Can we still express this an _Arithmetic Sequence_? Yes, we
just are adding up a negative common difference.

No matter what we plug in though, we always end up with two terms we don't know,
the common difference and the first term. This means that we'll have to utilize
what is known as the "System Of Equations", which we'll introduce here, and will
become more important as we delve into Trigonometry in future lectures.

Let's write out what we know about our two terms in the form of the _Arithmetic
Sequence_ Formula:

$$ a_8 = a_1 + (8 - 1)d = 75 $$

$$ a_{20} = a_1 + (20 - 1)d = 39 $$

Let's simplify these two equations a bit:

$$ a_1 + 7d = 75 $$

$$ a_1 + 19d = 39 $$

The technique for "Systems of Equations" starts off by finding opposite terms
for one of our equations. We can do this simply by multiplying one of our
equations by $-1$.

$$ (-1)(a_1 + 7d = 75) = -a_1 - 7d = -75 $$

Because we know these two terms lie within the same system, we know that $d$ is
the same number for each equation, and thusly if we add these two equations
together, $a_1$ will cancel out, and we can evaluate for $d$:

$$ (-a_1 - 7d = -75) + (a_1 + 19d = 39) \rightarrow 12d = -36 \rightarrow \boxed{d = -3} $$

Now, we can use this value for $d$ to solve for $a_1$, either of our original
equations will work:

$$ a_8 = a_1 + (8 - 1)(-3) = 75 $$

$$ a_1 + (7)(-3) = 75 $$

$$ a_1 - 21 = 75 $$

$$ \boxed{a_1 = 96}  $$

And thusly our formula is:

$$ a_n = 96 + (n - 1)(-3) $$

And we can simplify:

$$ a_n = 96 - 3n + 3 $$

$$ \boxed{a_n = -3n + 99} $$

We should now test at least one of our original equations, if we plug in for
$a_8$, we indeed get $75$.

Now, we can solve for the other part of our problem, solving for $a_{12}$.

$$ a_{12} = -3(12) + 99 $$

$$ \boxed{a_{12} = 63} $$
