# Geometric Sequences (Precalculus - College Algebra 71)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qyHCnYewdrQ)

---

Geometric Sequences are very similar to Arithmetic Sequences. In Arithmetic
Sequences, we add up numbers in a sequence over and over and over again. Within
this, we find a Common Difference, _i.e._ the same difference between each
number.

In Geometric Sequences, we have something similar, except instead of adding, we
multiply. To reiterate, this means that in Geometric Sequences we multiply over
and over to get to the next term and the next term and so on. This number,
instead of being called the Common Difference, is what is known as the _Common
Ratio_, often denoted with the letter $r$.

This makes sense, in that were you to subtract any two consecutive numbers in an
Arithmetic Sequence, you would get the same number, the same difference.

In the case of Geometric Sequences, the _Common Ratio_ would be discovered by
dividing any two consecutive terms in a sequence to find the same ratio, the
same fraction/rational number.

---

Consider the following sequence:

$$ 2, -6, 18, -54, 162, \text{ ... } $$

If you consider if this is an Arithmetic Sequence, we'd quickly discover that it
can't be, there is no Common Difference between any of these two terms.

However, if you then consider a Ratio one could multiply by, one quickly
discover that we are multiplying every iteration by $-3$. This is our _Common
Ratio_.

$$ r = -3 $$

---

Consider the following sequence:

$$ 2, 9, 16, 23, 30, \text{ ... } $$

This _is_ an Arithmetic Sequence, we are _adding_ $7$ every single iteration,
and thusly we have a _Common Difference_ of $7$.

$$ d = 7 $$

---

Consider the following sequence:

$$ 1, 2, 4, 7, 11, 16, 22, \text{ ... } $$

This is not Geometric, once we arrive at $7$, we realize that it's not
continuously multiplying by $2$.

This is also not Arithmetic, as it is not adding any constant to get to the next
term.

Now, there is a Pattern here, it is adding $1$ to every previous difference for
the next term:

$$ 1 + 1 = 2, 2 + 2 = 4, 4 + 3 = 7, \text{ ... } $$

It doesn't mean that this isn't a Sequence, and that a Series cannot be derived
from it, it just means that the Pattern doesn't fall within the definitions for
either Arithmetic or Geometric Sequences.

---

$$ 7, 14, 28, 56, \text{ ... } $$

This is Geometric, in that we are multiplying by $2$ every iteration:

$$ r = 2 $$

---

**Geometric Sequence Formula**

Very much like the _Arithmetic Sequence_, there is a Formula for the _Geometric
Sequence_:

$$ a_n = a_1r^{n - 1} $$

Very much like the _Arithmetic Sequence Formula_, The _Geometric Sequence
Formula_ "burns up" the first term, and thusly involves the use of $n - 1$ when
calculating the value of $a_n$.

---

Consider the following sequence:

$$ -3, 1, -\frac{1}{3}, \frac{1}{9}, \text{ ... } $$

Here, we can tell this is not an _Arithmetic Sequence_, but a quick glance tells
us it is a _Geometric Sequence_. The common ratio is $-\dfrac{1}{3}$.

Finding the _Geometric Sequence Formula_ for this is relatively straight
forward:

$$
\begin{align*}
a_1 = -3 \\
r = -\frac{1}{3}
\end{align*}
$$

$$ a_n = (-3)\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right)^{n - 1} $$

Note, do not multiply to simplify here or in any of these _Geometric Sequence
Formula_ evaluations, that would break the order of operations as you need to
evaluate the exponent first.

---

Let's say we wanted to find a Geometric Sequence from the formula instead?

Consider if we were given the following pieces of information about a Geometric
Sequence:

$$
\begin{align*}
a_6 = 243 \\
r = -3 \\
\end{align*}
$$

Thanks to the _Geometric Formula_, we can determine a_1.

$$ a_n = a_1r^{n - 1} $$

$$ 243 = a_1(-3)^{6 - 1} $$

$$ 243 = a_1(-3)^{5} $$

$$ 243 = a_1(-243) $$

$$ a_1 = -1 $$

And this gives us the full _Geometric Formula_ for determining any number in
this sequence:

$$ a_n = -1(-3)^{n - 1} $$

---

Let's say you're not given a first term nor a common ratio.

$$
\begin{align*}
a_3 = \frac{1}{3} \\
a_6 = \frac{1}{81} \\
\end{align*}
$$

We can take one of these and fill in as much as we can of the _Geometric
Sequence Formula_:

$$ a_n = a_1r^{n - 1} $$

$$ a_3 = a_1r^{3 - 1} $$

$$ \frac{1}{3} = a_1r^{2} $$

We can do the same with our other term:

$$ a_6 = a_1r^{6 - 1} $$

$$ \frac{1}{81} = a_1r^{5} $$

Much like in our section on Arithmetic Sequences, we can use a sort of
product/ratio of these two expressions for solving for either $a_1$ or $r$ on
both equations, then setting them equal to one another and solving for the other
$a_1$ or $r$:

$$ \frac{1}{3} = a_1r^{2} $$

$$ a_1 = \left(\frac{1}{3}\right)\left(\frac{1}{r^2}\right)$$

$$ a_1 = \frac{1}{3r^2} $$

$$ \frac{1}{81} = a_1r^{5} $$

$$ a_1 = \left(\frac{1}{81}\right)\left(\frac{1}{r^5}\right) $$

$$ a_1 = \frac{1}{81r^5} $$

$$ \frac{1}{3r^2} = \frac{1}{81r^5} $$

$$ 3r^2 = 81r^5 $$

Note that generally, we would be reticent to divide by a variable as we don't
know if it is $0$ or not. However, because the problem statment tells us that
this is a _Geometric Sequence_ (or at least it should), then we can safely
assume that $r$ cannot be $0$ by the simple fact that then every term in our
sequence would be $0$. Thusly we can safely divide any term with $r$ in it:

$$ 3r^2 = 81r^5 $$

$$ \frac{3r^2}{3r^2} = \frac{81r^5}{3r^2} $$

$$ 1 = 27r^3 $$

$$ \frac{1}{27} = r^3 $$

$$ \sqrt[3]{\frac{1}{27}} = \sqrt[3]{r^3} $$

$$ r = \frac{1}{3} $$

Now we can use this to find $a_1$. We can use either of our equations from
before that solved for $a_1$, but didn't yet have $r$:

$$ a_1 = \frac{1}{3r^2} $$

$$ a_1 = \frac{1}{3\left(\dfrac{1}{3}\right)^2} $$

$$ a_1 = \frac{1}{3\left(\dfrac{1}{9}\right)} $$

$$ a_1 = \frac{1}{\dfrac{3}{9}} $$

$$ a_1 = \frac{1}{\dfrac{1}{3}} $$

$$ a_1 = 3 $$

And now we can write out our _Geometric Sequence Formula_:

$$ a_n = (3)\left(\frac{1}{3}\right)^{n - 1} $$

Now, as an extra bit of info here, in this case you could combine these by
converting them to a common base. Consider this expression of the same formula:

$$ a_n = \left(\frac{1}{3}\right)^{-1}\left(\frac{1}{3}\right)^{n - 1} $$

Because we are multiplying to terms with the same base, we can add the exponents
like so:

$$ a_n = \left(\frac{1}{3}\right)^{-1 + n - 1} $$

Which finally evaluates to:

$$ a_n = \left(\frac{1}{3}\right)^{n - 2} $$
