# Geometric Series (Precalculus - College Algebra 72)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_yDqkrbd5mk)

---

Recall that all a Series is is a Sequence that is added up together.

Much like how there is an _Arithmetic Series Formula_ for adding up terms in an
_Arithmetic Sequence_, there is also a _Geometric Series Formula_ for adding up
terms in a _Geometric Sequence_:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{a_1r^{k - 1}} = \frac{a_1}{1 - r}\left(1 - r^n\right) $$

Note that this form is not what is usually present in textbooks, but we are
using this form for a specific reason that will hopefully become apparent as we
go through this lecture.

As we go through this, we will also cover what is known as an "Infinite Series",
in which we ask the question, "Given an infinite number of numbers in an
infinite sequence , can we still produce a meaningful sum from that sequence to
come to a series?" The answer, paradoxically, is "Sometimes." We will try our
best to give an introduction to this concept towards the end of this lecture,
but it is admittedly somewhat difficult to wrap your mind around at first.
Nevertheless, repeated exposure to this concept will hopefully give you an
understanding around _Infinite Series_. Let's get started.

---

Consider the following Geometric Sequence:

$$ \frac{3}{9} + \frac{3^2}{9} + \frac{3^3}{9} + \text{ ... } + \frac{3^n}{9} \text{ ... } a^n = \text{ ?} $$

This is what is known as a "Partial Sum". Why "Partial"? Well, because we aren't
adding up an infinite number of terms, but rather a finite set of our sequence.

Because they have given us $\dfrac{3^n}{9}$, we are fortunate in that we don't
have to go through the usual rigmarole of determining what is/isn't changing to
determine a common expression. The Problem Statement has essentially handed us
that as a shortcut. They have essentially given us the value of $a_n$.

$$ a_n = \frac{3^n}{9} $$

If we then ask us to create a series through summation, we can simply plug that
in as our argument into a standard summation expression:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{\frac{3^k}{9}} $$

Note we exchange out $n$ for $k$ to avoid confusion when expressing as
summation.

Now, this doesn't look like something we could plug into our _Geometric Series
Formula_. Again, that looks like this:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{a_1r^{k - 1}} = \frac{a_1}{1 - r}\left(1 - r^n\right) $$

We'll need to think a bit outside of the box to get our summation expression to
conform so we can plug it into our _Geometric Series Formula_, and get the sum
for our entire Series. So how do we do that?

Consider we can get clever with our exponents here:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{\frac{3^{k + 1 - 1}}{9}} $$

Which we can further say is:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{\frac{3^{k - 1} \cdot 3^1}{9}} $$

Which we can then rewrite as:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{\frac{1}{9} \cdot 3 \cdot (3)^{k - 1}} $$

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{\frac{1}{3}\left(3^{k - 1}\right)} $$

And this looks much closer to our _Geometric Series Formula_, we can now use
these values to plug into our formula and find the summation of the series:

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{\frac{1}{3}\left(3\right)^{k - 1}} = \frac{\dfrac{1}{3}}{1 - 3}\left(1 - 3^n\right) $$

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{\frac{1}{3}\left(3\right)^{k - 1}} = \frac{\dfrac{1}{3}}{-2}\left(1 - 3^n\right) $$

$$ \sum^{n}_{k = 1}{\frac{1}{3}\left(3\right)^{k - 1}} = -\frac{1}{6}\left(1 - 3^n\right) $$

---

# Infinite Series

The thought that you could take an infinitely large sequence and somehow get a
finite series (summation) out of it might seem impossible to you, but in truth,
there are some Geometric Series that indeed can have an Infinite number of
terms, but have a finite summation. You just have to know what the conditions
are for this to occur.

When an Infinite Sequence does add up to a finite summation, this is what is
called _Convergence_.

When an Infinite Sequence adds up to either $-\infty$ or $\infty$, we call that
_Divergence_.

An _Infinite Geometric Series Formula_ can be expressed very similarly to a
standard _Geometric Series Formula_:

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{a_1r^{k - 1}} = \frac{a^1}{1 - r}\left(1 - r^n\right) $$

Now, notice we have $n$ and $\infty$ where $n$ would normally go in our
summation notation. Consider if $n = \infty$, what would happen?

Well...that depends on what $r$ is, right? If $r > 1$, then $r^n$ eventually
becomes $\infty$ as it grows exponentially by $\infty$.

But if $r < 1$, then it grows infinitely smaller towards, but never reaching,
$0$. This part is what becomes interesting, if we grow closer and closer to $0$,
eventually we get close enough to be negligible, making our _Infinite Geometric
Series Formula_ look like this:

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{a_1r^{k - 1}} = \frac{a^1}{1 - r}\left(1 - 0\right) $$

Which is:

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{a_1r^{k - 1}} = \frac{a^1}{1 - r}(1) $$

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{a_1r^{k - 1}} = \frac{a^1}{1 - r} $$

And that is a finite number!

But this only occurs dependant on the value of $r$. This means that there is a
range of numbers in which $r$ resides in which an _Infinite Geometric Series_
can be expressed as a finite number, and a certain range of numbers in which $r$
results in the _Geometric Series_ summing up to $-\infty$ or $\infty$.

For sake of simplicity, we can generalize these rules as:

An Infinite Series...

1. Will have a _Finite_ Sum if:

   $$ -1 < r < 1 $$

   Which can also be expressed as:

   $$ |r| < 1 $$

   This is what is known as _Convergence_.

2. Will have a _Infinite_ Sum (_i.e._ $-\infty$ or $\infty$) if:

   $$ |r| \geq 1 $$

   And this is what is known as _Divergence_.

Let's hammer home this concept with a few examples.

---

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{8\left(\frac{1}{3}\right)^{k - 1}} =  $$

$$ r = \frac{1}{3} $$

Because $|r| < 1$, this _Infinite Series_ will _Converge_. This means we can
find the _sum_, and that is what we will do now:

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{8\left(\frac{1}{3}\right)^{k - 1}} = \frac{a_1}{1 - r} $$

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{8\left(\frac{1}{3}\right)^{k - 1}} = \frac{8}{1 - \dfrac{1}{3}} $$

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{8\left(\frac{1}{3}\right)^{k - 1}} = \frac{8}{\dfrac{2}{3}} $$

$$ \boxed{\sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{8\left(\frac{1}{3}\right)^{k - 1}} = 12} $$

---

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{\frac{1}{2}\left(3\right)^{k - 1}} = $$

$$ r = 3 $$

Consider again, the test: $|r| < 1$. This fails that test, therefore this
_Infinite Series_ _Diverges_. Consider our _Infinite Series Formula_:

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{a_1r^{k - 1}} = \frac{a^1}{1 - r}\left(1 - r^n\right) $$

If we consider just the right hand side factor: $(1 - r^n)$, we'll think on it
and passing $3^{\infty}$ is very very large, it eventually becomes $\infty$, and
then if you subtract $\infty$ from $1$, you eventually get $-\infty$.
Multiplying this by the rest of the equation gives us $\infty$, and so we would
say this series Diverges.

---

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{3\left(-\frac{2}{3}\right)^{k - 1}} =  $$

$$ r = -\frac{2}{3} $$

Again, the test: $|r| < 1$.

This passes, therefore this Infinite Series _Converges_, and we can solve:

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{3\left(-\frac{2}{3}\right)^{k - 1}} = \frac{a_1}{1 - r} $$

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{3\left(-\frac{2}{3}\right)^{k - 1}} = \frac{3}{1 - \left(-\dfrac{2}{3}\right)} $$

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{3\left(-\frac{2}{3}\right)^{k - 1}} = \frac{3}{\dfrac{5}{3}} $$

$$ \boxed{\sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{3\left(-\frac{2}{3}\right)^{k - 1}} = \frac{9}{5}} $$

---

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{\frac{1}{9}\left(-\frac{5}{4}\right)^{k - 1}} =  $$

$$ r = -\frac{5}{4} $$

This doesn't pass the $|r| < 1$ thest, and thusly this _Infinite Series_
_Diverges_.

---

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{3\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)^k} =  $$

Note that even though this doesn't conform completely, as the common ratio is
being raised to $k$ instead of $k - 1$, this doesn't change what the common
ratio is:

$$ r = \frac{2}{3} $$

Which passes the $|r| < 1$ test. Therefore this _Infinite Series_ _Converges_
and we can find the summation.

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{3\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)^k} = \frac{a_1}{1 - r} $$

And this is where the $k$ and the $k - 1$ difference matters, because our first
term is not $3$. Instead, plug in $k = 1$ to our argument and we'll get:

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{3\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)^k} = \frac{2}{1 - \left(\dfrac{2}{3}\right)} $$

Which we can then further evaluate to get our final summation:

$$ \sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{3\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)^k} = \frac{2}{\dfrac{1}{3}}$$

$$ \boxed{\sum^{\infty}_{k = 1}{3\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)^k} = 6} $$
