# Proof by Mathematical Induction (Precalculus - College Algebra 73)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x5cWX-EyLEI)

---

The concept of Induction in Mathematics is a powerful one, and is a lead into
one of the many aspects of Discrete Mathematics, in which Proofs are utilized to
ascertain Truths/Falsehoods (essentially).

The idea behind Induction is that if one can prove the next idea for the next
term and the next term and the next term and so on throughout a series, then we
essentially get a kind of "domino effect", in which a statement is proven true
by iteration and/or a kind of recursive technique.

---

Induction Can Be Broken Down into the following Steps:

1. Show that at least 1 term is true (base case).

   $n = 1$

2. Assume that this case is at least true for 1 other term:

   $n = k$

   You must treat this as _fact_.

3. Prove that the "Next One", the next term, is also true:

   $n = k + 1$ is true.

---

Consdier this series:

$$ 1 + 3 + 5 + \text{ ... } + (2n - 1) = n^2 $$

Does the sum of all these odd numbered terms equal $n^2$? Let's see if we can
prove it by Mathematical Induction:

$$ n = 1 \text{ : } 1 = 1^2 \text{ : True} $$

$$ n = 2 \text{ : } 1 + 3 = 2^2 \text{ : True} $$

Now, we could stop here, but let's do a couple more just to illustrate that this
is indeed a truth statement (within this finite set we are testing):

$$ n = 3 \text{ : } 1 + 3 + 5 = 3^2 \text{ : True} $$

$$ n = 4 \text{ : } 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 4^2 \text{ : True} $$

This finishes Step 1 from above. Let's now do step 2.

Assume that this is true:

$$ n = k $$

$$ 1 + 3 + 5 + \text{ ... } + (2k - 1) = k^2 $$

We're not just replacing $n$ with $k$ here, but what this is saying is, assume
that this logic is true for _some other value_.

Now let's do step 3.

Show for $n = k + 1$

$$ 1 + 3 + 5 + \text{ ... } + (2k - 1) + (2(k + 1) - 1) = (k + 1)^2 $$

Notice we just added onto our series. We assume that:

$$ 1 + 3 + 5 + \text{ ... } + (2k - 1) = k^2 $$

From our second step, thusly we can rewrite this as:

$$ k^2 + (2(k + 1) - 1) = (k + 1)^2 $$

We can now simplify to:

$$ k^2 + 2k + 2 - 1 = (k + 1)^2 $$

$$ k^2 + 2k + 1 = (k + 1)^2 $$

$$ (k + 1)^2 = (k + 1)^2 $$

And this is true, and thusly our Proof is done, and our assertion is True.

Let's review this a bit.

One might say "Yes, but you assumed in the second step, so how could this be
true?" This is a valid question, but let's inspect why this proof is
definitively true. We have proven in the third step that any next term
$(2(k + 1)+ 1)$ will prove true throughout the series. We now that the first two
terms (and a couple after that) are true, as demonstrated in the first step.

Therefore, if the first two steps are true, and we have proven that any next
step within our series will also be true, then we have definitively proven that
this entire series equaling $n^2$ is indeed true.

---

Let's attempt another Proof, this time we'll be a bit more concise. Consider the
following assertion:

$$ 1 + 5 + 9 + \text{ ... } + (4n - 3) = 2n^2 - n $$

1.

$$
\begin{align*}
n = 1 \text{ : } 1 = 2 \cdot 1^2 - 1 \text{ : True} \\
\end{align*}
$$

2. Assume $n = k$:

$$ 1 + 5 + 9 + \text{ ... } + (4k - 3) = 2k^2 - k $$

3. Prove $n = k + 1$:

$$ [1 + 5 + 9 + \text{ ... } + (4k - 3)] + (4(k + 1) - 3) = 2(k + 1)^2 - (k + 1) $$

$$ (2k^2 - k) + (4(k + 1) - 3) = 2(k + 1)^2 - (k + 1) $$

$$ (2k^2 - k) + (4k + 4 - 3) = 2(k + 1)^2 - (k + 1) $$

$$ (2k^2 - k) + (4k + 1) = 2(k + 1)^2 - (k + 1) $$

$$ 2k^2 - k + 4k + 1 = 2(k + 1)^2 - (k + 1) $$

$$ 2k^2 + 3k + 1 = 2(k + 1)^2 - (k + 1) $$

$$ 2k^2 + 3k + 1 = 2(k + 1)(k + 1) - (k + 1) $$

$$ 2k^2 + 3k + 1 = 2(k^2 + 2k + 1) - (k + 1) $$

$$ 2k^2 + 3k + 1 = 2k^2 + 4k + 2 - (k + 1) $$

$$ 2k^2 + 3k + 1 = 2k^2 + 4k + 2 - k - 1 $$

$$ 2k^2 + 3k + 1 = 2k^2 + 3k + 1 $$

And yeah, those are equal, this is proven by Mathematical Induction.
