# Area of a Sector, Angular Velocity, Applications (Precalculus - Trigonometry 5)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x6wnYbOBCic)

---

In this section we are going to cover some basic applications of Angles in how
they can apply to some basic calculations in astrophysics, among other examples.

---

## Difference Between Two Angles

Consider the following problem statement:

> I live in a city at $48.685701\degree$ Latitude. I have to travel to a city at
> $43.602646\degree$ Latitude (both locations are at the same Longitude). How
> far are the cities if $r = 3960\text{ miles}$?

There is the assumption that if our planet were perfect sphere. But if we assume
this, we can answer this question relatively easily, by calculating the distance
between the two angles of the two cities using the value of $r$ and the two
Latitudes. This is contingent on the fact that both cities are at the same
Longitude. If this were not the case, then calculating this would be more
difficult.

$$ \theta = 48.685701\degree - 43.602646\degree $$

$$ \theta = 5.083055\degree $$

$$ r = 3960\text{ miles} $$

$$ S = 3960\text{ miles} \cdot 5.083055\degree $$

Notice, however, that we cannot actually simply do the calculation, because $S$
_only works with radians_ as you may recall from a couple of lectures ago.

$$ S = \frac{r \cdot \theta\text{ radians}}{1 \text{ radians}} $$

This means that we will have to convert our degrees to radians prior to solving
this problem.

$$ 5.083055\degree \cdot \frac{\pi}{180\degree}\text{ radians} \approx 0.088716045\text{ radians} $$

And now we can find the distance between our two cities using our formula:

$$ S = 3960\text{ miles} \cdot 0.088716045\text{ radians} = 351.3\text{ miles} $$

---

## Area Of A Sector

In this section, we will discuss how to determine the area of a Sector, _i.e._,
a section of a circle.

If we recall from our previous discussions on circles, we have the formula for
the Area of a Circle:

$$ A = \pi \cdot r^2 $$

And also recall that the Angle of the entire Circle in radians is $2\pi$.

$$ \theta = 2\pi $$

Now let's say that we don't necessarily want to measure out a full rotation (as
that is somewhat trivial if you understand our previous discussion on radians).
Let's say instead we wanted to measure the Area of a _Sector_ of the Circle?

For this we would need to be able to equate two proportions. Consider the
following verboase equality:

$$ \frac{\text{Area of The Sector}}{\text{Angle Of The Sector}} = \frac{\text{Entire Area of Circle}}{\text{Entire Angle of Circle}} $$

If we plug in what we know about circles thus far, we get:

$$ \frac{A}{\theta} = \frac{\pi \cdot r^2}{2\pi} $$

And notice here that the $\pi$ simplify and we actually get a formula for
determining the area of a sector:

$$ \frac{A}{\theta} = \frac{r^2}{2} $$

Again, this will _only work with radians_ as one revolution's area,
$\pi \cdot r^2$, is measured in radians, as is the angle of an entire circle,
$2\pi$.

To further simplify, we can find the Area of a Sector using the following
formula:

$$ A = \frac{1}{2}r^2\theta $$

To reiterate, the angle has to be in Radians. Let's demonstrate exactly why.
When we add the unites of each of these calculations, we start to see:

$$ A = \left(\frac{1}{2\text{ radians}}\right) \cdot r^2\text{ units of measurement} \cdot \theta\text{ radians} $$

Of course this simplifies down to:

$$ A = \left(\frac{r^2\text{ units of measurement} \cdot \theta{\text{ radians}}}{2\text{ radians}}\right) $$

The radians cancel out:

$$ A = \left(\frac{r^2\text{ units of measurement} \cdot \theta{\cancel{\text{ radians}}}}{2\cancel{\text{ radians}}}\right) $$

And our area, $A$ is left in whatever units of measurement we have.

Without this knowledge, we could easily miscalculate if a given problem
statement provides the problem statement in _degrees_ and not _radians_. So be
careful when using this formula.

Knowing this, let's go through a few examples:

---

Consider if you were given the following data on Circle:

$$ r = 3\text{ meters} $$

$$ \theta = 120\degree $$

And we were asked to find the area of this sector defined by the angle,
$\theta$.

Notice that we have the information we need to solve for the Area of this
particular sector, but we first need to convert $\theta$ into _radians_, for the
reasons discussed above.

$$ \theta = 120\degree \cdot \frac{\pi}{180\degree}\text{ radians} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{2\pi}{3}\text{ radians} $$

And this is what we can plug into our formula to find the Area of this Sector:

$$ A = \frac{1}{2}r^2\theta $$

$$ A = \frac{1}{2}(3)^2\left(\frac{2\pi}{3}\right) $$

$$ A = \frac{1}{2}(9)\left(\frac{2\pi}{3}\right) $$

$$ A = \frac{9}{2}\left(\frac{2\pi}{3}\right) $$

$$ A = \frac{9}{\cancel{2}}\left(\frac{\cancel{2}\pi}{3}\right) $$

$$ A = 3\pi \text{ meters}^2 \rightarrow A \approx 9.425\text{ meters}^2 $$

Keep in mind the units of $\text{meters}$ indeed do square if we square the
radius measurement as we did in this formula (this is always the case when
calculating an area is that the units are squared in the final calculation).

---

Let's say we were given an Area and a radius instead, and we're tasked with
finding the Angle of a sector?

$$ r = 6\text{ meters} $$

$$ A = 8\text{ meters}^2 $$

This is actually a bit easier as there is no conversion to radians, we can
simply plug these numbers into our formula:

$$ A = \frac{1}{2}r^2\theta $$

$$ 8 = \frac{1}{2}(6)^2\theta $$

$$ 8 = \frac{1}{2}(36)\theta $$

$$ 8 = 18\theta $$

$$ \frac{8}{18} = \theta $$

$$ \frac{4}{9}\text{ radians} = \theta $$

---

## Angular Velocity On A Rotating Sphere

This one gets a bit in depth, and is specific to some generalized astrophysics,
so I'll simply refer you to the Video at 00:22:04 to the end.
