# Reciprocal Identities in Trigonometry (Precalculus - Trigonometry 9)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=98jDUsZ2JYA)

---

In this lecture, we will be addressing reciprocal identities of Trigonometric
Functions. This will help us infer when a Trigonometric Function lies on the
unit circle, and when it doesn't, and how the determiniation of a Trigonometric'
Function's Reciprocal Identity can be applied to both.

---

**A Bit Of Review**

Let's Review once again which Reciprocal Trigonometric Functions align with
their respective Trigonometric Functions. Let's consider that we have two
coordinates along a _Unit Circle_, $x$, and $y$. Note again that a _Unit Circle_
is simply a circle on a standard graph that has a radius of exactly $1$ unit
from the origin, usually $(0, 0)$. The definitions for our Trigonometric
Functions and their Reciprocal Trigonometric Functions within the context of a
_Unit Circle_ are as follows:

$$ \sin\theta = y \rightarrow \csc\theta = \frac{1}{y} \rightarrow \csc\theta = \frac{1}{\sin\theta}$$

$$ \cos\theta = x \rightarrow \sec\theta = \frac{1}{x}  \rightarrow \sec\theta = \frac{1}{\cos\theta} $$

$$ \tan\theta = \frac{y}{x} = \frac{\sin\theta}{\cos\theta} \rightarrow \cot\theta = \frac{x}{y} \rightarrow \frac{\cos\theta}{\sin\theta} $$

---

Consider the following two angles:

$$ \sin\theta = \frac{4}{5} \text{ , } \cos\theta = -\frac{3}{5} $$

Why gives us two functions? Well, this helps us determine where the point along
the _Graph_ is, what quadrant the angle is in, and is enough information for us
to determine the other Trigonometric Functions from just these two functions. In
this case, we really just have a $y$ and an $x$ coordinate respectively.

Now, notice that we use the term _Graph_, that is because we don't yet know if
these Trigonometric Functions define a point on the _Unit Circle_ or not. But we
can easily find out, do our two points lie between $1$ and $-1$. If so, then it
lies within the _Unit Circle_ and is an angle within the confines of a _Unit
Circle_.

If we didn't have two functions, we couldn't determine the angle, we _need_ both
points of sine and cosine.

$$ \sin\theta = \frac{4}{5} \text{ , } \cos\theta = -\frac{3}{5} $$

We can easily see that this lies within Quadrant II of the _Unit Circle_, as $x$
is negative, and $y$ is positive.

Let's now fill out the remaining trigonometric functions:

$$
\begin{align*}
\sin\theta = \frac{4}{5} \\
\csc\theta = \frac{5}{4} \\
\cos\theta = -\frac{3}{5} \\
\sec\theta = -\frac{5}{3} \\
\tan\theta = \frac{\left(\dfrac{4}{5}\right)}{\left(-\dfrac{3}{5}\right)} = -\frac{4}{3} \\
\cot\theta = \frac{\left(-\dfrac{3}{5}\right)}{\left(\dfrac{4}{5}\right)} = -\frac{3}{4} \\
\end{align*}
$$

---

Let's take another example:

$$ \sin\theta = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \text{ , } \cos\theta = \frac{1}{2} $$

$$
\begin{align*}
\sin\theta = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \\
\csc\theta = \frac{2}{\sqrt{3}} \rightarrow \frac{2\sqrt{3}}{3}\\
\cos\theta = \frac{1}{2} \\
\sec\theta = \frac{2}{1} \\
\tan\theta = \frac{\left(\dfrac{\sqrt{3}}{2}\right)}{\left(\dfrac{1}{2}\right)} = \sqrt{3} \\
\cot\theta = \frac{\left(\dfrac{1}{2}\right)}{\left(\dfrac{\sqrt{3}}{2}\right)} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}} \rightarrow \frac{\sqrt{3}}{3} \\
\end{align*}
$$

---

**When The Trigonometric Function is NOT On the Unit Circle**

Consider the following formulas that we have covered at length now. These will
be in the context of the _Unit Circle_ (hence the variable $r$ representing the
radius):

$$
\begin{align*}
\sin\theta = \frac{y}{r} \\
\csc\theta = \frac{r}{y} \\
\cos\theta = \frac{x}{r} \\
\sec\theta = \frac{r}{x} \\
\tan\theta = \frac{y}{x} \\
\cot\theta = \frac{x}{y} \\
\end{align*}
$$

Also consider this take on the Pythagorean Theorem, which gives us the _Equation
Of A Circle_:

$$ x^2 + y^2 = r^2 $$

Now, we can determine an angle given just a single Trigonometric Function then.

Consider the following:

$$ \sin\theta = \frac{12}{13} $$

Can we determine the values of $x$ and $r$ then? Well yeah, in fact two are
given to us:

$$ y = 12 \text{ , } r = 13 \text{ , } x = ? $$

And given the _Equation Of A Circle_, we can use basic quadratic solving
techniques to determine the value of $x$:

$$ x^2 + y^2 = r^2 $$

$$ x^2 + (12)^2 = (13)^2 $$

$$ x^2 + 144 = 169 $$

$$ x^2 = 25 $$

$$ \sqrt{x^2} = \sqrt{25} $$

$$ x = \pm 5 $$

Now, notice we don't know what quadrant this point lies within, we just know it
is one of two points:

$$ (5, 12) \text{ or } (-5, 12) $$

We would need to be told the Quadrant $\theta$ is in, told to us in the problem
statement, to know which point for $x$ is the actual coordinate.

Now, let's solve this as if we didn't like the fact that this wasn't a _Unit
Circle_. Can we even do that? Yes, because when given $\sin\theta$, the angle of
$\theta$ does not care about the dimensions of $r$. We just have to adjust our
form,ula to reflect that it lies on the _Unit Circle_. Consider if we redefined
$\sin\theta$:

$$ \sin\theta = \frac{y}{r} $$

Well consider it were on the unit circle:

$$ \sin\theta = \frac{\left(\dfrac{12}{13}\right)}{1} $$

This fulfills the same ideas around $\sin\theta$, we just did some basic
mathematics to change the coordinate of $y$. After this, we can just solve as
usual.

$$ x^2 + y^2 = r^2 $$

$$ x^2 + \left(\frac{12}{13}\right)^2 = 1^2 $$

$$ x^2 + \left(\frac{144}{169}\right) = 1 $$

$$ x^2 + \left(\frac{144}{169}\right) = 1 $$

Now, we'll stop here, and point out, this doesn't given us a simple answer, it
gives us an approximation due to the fraction of $\dfrac{12}{13}$. This is why
we multiply everything by $13$ to simplify our answer for $x$. But note that the
angle $\theta$ doesn't change.

Let's now quickly define our remaining Trigonometric Functions (not on the Unit
Circle). Let's also say our problem statement told us that our point is in
Quadrant II:

$$
\begin{align*}
\sin\theta = \frac{12}{13} \\
\csc\theta = \frac{13}{12} \\
\cos\theta = -\frac{5}{13} \\
\sec\theta = -\frac{13}{5} \\
\tan\theta = \frac{\left(\dfrac{12}{13}\right)}{\left(-\dfrac{5}{13}\right)} = -\frac{12}{5} \\
\cot\theta = -\frac{5}{12} \\
\end{align*}
$$

---

Let's consider another, slightly more difficult example:

$$ \sec\theta = 2 \text{ , } \sin\theta < 0 $$

now, we could be able to figure out $x$ and $r$ just from $\sec\theta$, but
without the second definition of $\sin\theta$ being less than $\theta$, we
wouldn't be able to figure out the sign of $y$.

Consider that $\sec\theta = 2$ is just:

$$ \sec\theta = \frac{2}{1} $$

This means:

$$ \cos\theta = \frac{1}{2} $$

This means:

$$
\begin{align*}
x = 1 \\
r = 2 \\
\end{align*}
$$

Now we can determine the potential values for $y$:

$$ x^2 + y^2 = r^2 $$

$$ (1)^2 + y^2 = (2)^2 $$

$$ 1 + y^2 = 4 $$

$$ y^2 = 3 $$

$$ \sqrt{y^2} = \pm \sqrt{3} $$

$$ y = \pm \sqrt{3} $$

And because in the problem statement we were told that $y$ was negative, we know
that:

$$ y = -\sqrt{3} $$

This leaves us with the following values:

$$
\begin{align*}
x = 1 \\
r = 2 \\
y = -\sqrt{3} \\
\end{align*}
$$

And our Trigonometric Functions are:

$$
\begin{align*}
\sin\theta = -\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \\
\csc\theta = -\frac{2}{\sqrt{3}} \rightarrow -\frac{2\sqrt{3}}{3} \\
\cos\theta = \frac{1}{2} \\
\sec\theta = \frac{2}{1} \rightarrow 2 \\
\tan\theta = \frac{\left(-\dfrac{\sqrt{3}}{2}\right)}{\left(\dfrac{1}{2}\right)} \rightarrow -\sqrt{3} \\
\cot\theta = -\frac{1}{\sqrt{3}} \rightarrow -\frac{\sqrt{3}}{3} \\
\end{align*}
$$
