# Pythagorean Identities for Trigonometric Functions (Precalculus - Trigonometry 10)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=huP3v7iZuLM)

---
Here we will be discussion bogh _Even And Odd Trigonometric Functions_, as well
as their _Pythagorean Identities_.
---

**Even And Odd Trigonometric Functions**

Recall in our lecture series on Graphing Functions, that we covered that _Even_
Functions are _Symmetrical_ along the $y$-axis. Think on the classic parabola
shape created by a standard quadratic formula when graphed. What opposite inputs
give the same outputs.

Conversely, _Odd_ Functions are _Symmetrical_ along the $x$-axis. This means
that opposite inputs, give opposite outputs. Think on the $S$-shape given by
cubic functions when graphed.

| Even                     | Odd                       |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------- |
| $f(-\theta) = f(\theta)$ | $f(-\theta) = -f(\theta)$ |

Let's now consider whether $cos(-\theta)$ is an _even_ or _odd_ function.

---

**Even Trigonometric Functions**

For an _even_ function, we would need to give opposite inputs, to get the same
output. Recall that our output of $cos\theta$ will yield us the $x$-coordinate
of our point.

The two inputs would have to be opposite each other, so the input, $\theta$
woudld receive it's opposite $-\theta$. The values we'll need to fill in are:

$$
\begin{align*}
\cos\theta = \text{ ?} \\
\cos(-\theta) = \text{ ?} \\
\end{align*}
$$

Let's now plug in a classic Unit Circle Value for $cos\theta$:

$$
\begin{align*}
\cos\theta = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}\\
\cos(-\theta) = \text{ ?} \\
\end{align*}
$$

In this case, $\theta = \dfrac{\pi}{6}$, so $-\theta = -\dfrac{\pi}{6}$. This
would yield us the point $\left(\dfrac{3}{2}, -\dfrac{1}{2}\right)$

They have the same $x$ coordinate. The _output_ is the same, but the inputs are
opposite, this means that $\cos\theta$ is an _Even_ function:

$$ \cos(-\theta) = \cos\theta $$

And of course, this means that it's _Reciprocal Function_, $\sec(-\theta)$ is
also an even function:

$$ \sec(-\theta) = \sec\theta $$

Of course, where $\sec\theta$ is defined (within it's domain, _i.e._
$x \neq 0$).

---

**Odd Trigonometric Functions**

Now, what about _Odd_ Trigonometric Functions.

Let's consider $\sin(\theta)$, where $\theta$ is our input and the
$y$-coordinate is our output. And let's take our same angle as in the previous
example:

$$
\begin{align*}
\sin\theta = \frac{1}{2} \\
\sin(-\theta) = \text{ ?} \\
\end{align*}
$$

In this case, $\theta = \dfrac{\pi}{2}$, and therefore
$-\theta = -\dfrac{\pi}{2}$. This means:

$$
\begin{align*}
\sin\theta = \frac{1}{2} \\
\sin(-\theta) = -\frac{1}{2} \\
\end{align*}
$$

This means that opposite inputs, $\theta$ and $-\theta$, yield opposite outputs,
$\dfrac{1}{2}$ and $-\dfrac{1}{2}$. This means that $\sin\theta$ is an
_Opposite_ Trigonometric Function.

$$ \sin(-\theta) = -\sin(\theta) $$

And this also means it's Reciprocal Function, $\csc(\theta)$ is also _Odd_:

$$ \csc(-\theta) = -\csc(\theta) $$

Tangent is also an opposite function. An easy way to determine this would be to
consider $\tan\left(\dfrac{\pi}{4}\right)$ and
$-\tan\left(\dfrac{\pi}{4}\right)$, which would be $1$ and $-1$ respectively.
Opposite inputs give opposite outputs.

$$ \tan\theta = -\tan\theta $$

And this means that $\tan\theta$ is an _Odd_ Trigonometric Function. And of
course, this means it's Reciprocal Function is also _Odd_:

$$ \cot\theta = -\cot\theta $$

---

**Examples**

The aforementioned points give us and additional bit of knowledge to determine a
value of a Trigonometric Function and it's point on the Unit Circle.

---

$$ \cos(-30\degree) = \cos(30\degree) $$

$$ \cos(-30\degree) = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} $$

$$ \cos(30\degree) = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} $$

---

$$ \sec(-30\degree) = \sec(30\degree) $$

$$ \sec(-30\degree) = \frac{2\sqrt{3}}{3} $$

$$ \sec(30\degree) = \frac{2\sqrt{3}}{3} $$

---

$$ \sin(-60\degree) = -\sin(60\degree) $$

$$ \sin(-60\degree) = -\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} $$

$$ \sin(60\degree) = \frac{3}{2} $$

---

$$ \csc\left(-\frac{\pi}{6}\right) = -\csc\left(\frac{\pi}{6}\right) $$

$$ \csc\left(-\frac{\pi}{6}\right) = -\frac{2}{1} $$

$$ \csc\left(\frac{\pi}{6}\right) = \frac{2}{1} $$

---

$$ \tan\left(-\frac{\pi}{4}\right) = -\tan\left(\frac{\pi}{4}\right) $$

$$ \tan\left(-\frac{\pi}{4}\right) = -1 $$

$$ \tan\left(\frac{\pi}{4}\right) = 1 $$

---

## Pythagorean Identities

Consider the classic Equation of a Circle:

$$ x^2 + y^2 = r^2 $$

On a _Unit Circle_, the radius, $r$, is just $1$. This changes our Equation of a
Circle to an _Equation of a Unit Circle_ to:

$$ x^2 + y^2 = 1^2 $$

Or Just:

$$ x^2 + y^2 = 1 $$

Now, considering that $\sin\theta = y$ and $\cos\theta = x$, we can substitute
these Trigonometric Functions into our _Equation of a Unit Circle_ like so:

$$ (\cos\theta)^2 + (\sin\theta)^2 = 1 $$

This expression is what is known as a _Pythagorean Identity For Trigonometric
Functions_.

There is another way we can write this. When squaring the entire output of a
Trigonometric function, we can prepend the writing of $\cos$ or $\sin$ or
$\tan$, etc. with the square power preceding the angle $\theta$. This is written
like so:

$$ \cos^2\theta + \sin^2\theta = 1 $$

Now, we can treat this like any standard equation, and we can isolate terms on
one side. Consider that with the above expression, we can rewrite it like so:

$$ \sin^2\theta = 1 - \cos^2\theta $$

Or like so:

$$ \cos^2\theta = 1 - \sin^2\theta $$

This is just one example of many _Pythagorean Identities_. Let's explore some of
the others:

---

$$
\begin{align*}
\sin^2\theta + \cos^2\theta = 1 \\
\sin^2\theta = 1 - \cos^2\theta \\
\cos^2\theta = 1 - \sin^2\theta \\
\end{align*}
$$

---

$$ \sin^2\theta + \cos^2\theta = 1 $$

What if we divided all our terms by $\sin^2\theta$?

$$ \frac{\sin^2\theta}{\sin^2\theta} + \frac{\cos^2\theta}{\sin^2\theta} = \frac{1}{\sin^2\theta} $$

But consider that $\dfrac{\cos^2\theta}{\sin^2\theta}$ is equal to
$\cot^2{\theta}$. This means:

$$ 1 + \cot^2\theta = \frac{1}{\sin^2\theta} $$

Additionally, $\dfrac{1}{\sin^2\theta}$ is just $\csc^\theta$.

$$ 1 + \cot^2\theta = \csc^2\theta $$

From here, we have another _Pythagorean Identity_ from which we can isolate
terms and get the following:

$$
\begin{align*}
1 + \cot^2\theta = \csc^2\theta \\
\cot^2\theta = \csc^2\theta - 1 \\
\csc^2\theta - \cot^2\theta = 1 \\
\end{align*}
$$

---

$$ \sin^2\theta + \cos^2\theta = 1 $$

Similarly, what happens if we divide all terms by $\cos^2\theta$?

$$ \frac{\sin^2\theta}{\cos^2\theta} + \frac{\cos^2\theta}{\cos^2\theta} = \frac{1}{\cos^2\theta} $$

Consider that $\dfrac{\sin^2\theta}{\cos^2\theta}$ is just $\tan^2\theta$:

$$ \tan^2\theta + 1 = \frac{1}{\cos^2\theta} $$

And also that $\dfrac{1}{\cos^2\theta}$ is just $\sec^2\theta$:

$$ \tan^2\theta + 1 = \sec^2\theta $$

Once again, we get another _Pythagorean Identity_ from which we can isolate
terms and get some helpful expressions:

$$
\begin{align*}
\tan^2\theta + 1 = \sec^2\theta \\
\tan^2\theta = \sec^2\theta - 1 \\
\sec^2\theta - \tan^2\theta = 1 \\
\end{align*}
$$

So let's do some examples on Simplifying using some of these _Pythagorean
Identities_ and also our knowledge of _Even/Odd_ Trionometric Functions.

---

**Examples**

---

$$ \tan\left(\frac{-37\pi}{4}\right) \rightarrow $$

Now, because we don't like dealing in negatives when evaluating Trigonometric
Functions. We can, but when we consider that $\tan\theta$ is always an _Odd_
Trigonometric Function, we can rewrite this as:

$$ \tan\left(\frac{-37\pi}{4}\right) \rightarrow -\tan\left(\frac{37\pi}{4}\right) $$

Now, obviously $\dfrac{37\pi}{4}$ is a lot of times around the _Unit Circle_.
Now, we could use our knowledge from one of our previous lectures to determine
the most reduced form, let's use the slightly more advanced method discusssed at
the end of that lecture to reduce this down to an angle we'll recognize on the
_Unit Circle_:

Understand that for $\tan\theta$, the _Period_ is $1\pi$.

We can take the _Period_ ($1\pi$) multiplied by the _Denominator_ ($4$), and
divide the _Numerator_ ($37\pi)$ by that product. In other words evaluate:

$$ \left(\frac{37\pi}{4\pi}\right) $$

The $\pi$s cancel:

$$ \left(\frac{37\cancel{\pi}}{4\cancel{\pi}}\right) $$

And we are left with:

$$ \frac{37}{4} $$

Now we only care about the remainder here:

$$ 37 \mod 4 = 1 $$

And this is how many $\pi$ are on the numerator. Leaving us with:

$$ \tan\left(\frac{-37\pi}{4}\right) \rightarrow -\tan\left(\frac{37\pi}{4}\right) \rightarrow -\tan\left(\frac{\pi}{4}\right) $$

Now $\tan\left(\dfrac{\pi}{4}\right) = 1$, thusly:

$$ \tan\left(\frac{-37\pi}{4}\right) \rightarrow -\tan\left(\frac{37\pi}{4}\right) \rightarrow -\tan\left(\frac{\pi}{4}\right) = -1 $$

---

Now, let's evaluate a few more examples. In the following, we won't necessarily
have to utilize the _Unit Circle_ to evaluate these thanks to the _Pythagorean
Identities_.

---

**Examples**

---

$$ \sin^2(40\degree) + \cos^2(40\degree) = \text{ ?} $$

Now, this looks very familiary, isn't this the same as:

$$ y^2 + x^2 = \text{ ?} $$

Yes, this is very simple, this is just one of our Pythagorean Identities. We can
just fill this in as:

$$ \sin^2(40\degree) + \cos^2(40\degree) = 1 $$

---

$$ \sec^2(18\degree) - \tan^2(18\degree) = \text{ ?} $$

Well, we can reference back our correlaries from the _Pythagorean Identites_:

$$
\begin{align*}
\tan^2\theta + 1 = \sec^2\theta \\
\tan^2\theta = \sec^2\theta - 1 \\
\sec^2\theta - \tan^2\theta = 1 \\
\end{align*}
$$

And lo and behold, the last Identity is our answer:

$$ \sec^2(18\degree) - \tan^2(18\degree) = 1 $$

---

$$ \tan\left(\frac{\pi}{4}\right) - \frac{\sin\left(\dfrac{\pi}{4}\right)}{\cos\left(\dfrac{\pi}{4}\right)} = \text{ ?} $$

This is just a matter of understanding what
$\dfrac{\sin\left(\dfrac{\pi}{4}\right)}{\cos\left(\dfrac{\pi}{4}\right)}$
evaluates to. This is just $\tan\left(\dfrac{\pi}{4}\right)$ as well, so it
evaluates to:

$$ \tan\left(\frac{\pi}{4}\right) - \tan\left(\frac{\pi}{4}\right) = \text{ ?} $$

$$ \tan\left(\frac{\pi}{4}\right) - \tan\left(\frac{\pi}{4}\right) = 0 $$

---

$$ \sin(\pi)\csc(\pi) = \text{ ?} $$

This can be rewritten as:

$$ \sin\pi\left(\frac{1}{\sin\pi}\right) = \text{ ?} $$

And is therefore evaluated as:

$$ \sin\pi\left(\frac{1}{\sin\pi}\right) = 1 $$

Now let's try some with different angles:

---

**Examples**

---

$$ \sec\left(-\frac{\pi}{18}\right)\cos\left(\frac{37\pi}{18}\right) = \text{ ?} $$

You might be tempted to evaluate each individually, but notice that they both
have the same denominator, AND they are reciprocal functions. This gives us a
hint. Let's try to simplify our cosine angle. Recall our method:

1. Determine the _Period_, for cosine that is $2\pi$.

2. Multiple the _Period_ by the _Denominator: $2\pi \cdot 18 = 36\pi$

3. Divide the Numerator By the Denominator and determine the remainder:

$$ 37 \mod 36 = 1 $$

This is the amount you multiply by $\pi$ over the denominator to find the
simplified form of our angle. Reduced to it's most simplified form, this leaves
us with the angle $\dfrac{\pi}{18} \text{ radians}$. Now we can just plug this
in:

$$ \sec\left(-\frac{\pi}{18}\right)\cos\left(\frac{\pi}{18}\right) = \text{ ?} $$

Recall also that secant is an _Even_ function, this means:

$$ \sec(-\theta) = \sec(\theta) $$

And this means we can further evaluate as:

$$ \sec\left(\frac{\pi}{18}\right)\cos\left(\frac{\pi}{18}\right) = \text{ ?} $$

If we rewrite this by converting our secant to a cosine expression, the answer
becomes clear:

$$ \frac{1}{\cos\left(\dfrac{\pi}{18}\right)}\cdot \frac{\cos\left(\dfrac{\pi}{18}\right)}{1} = \text{ ?} $$

Multiplying reciprocals always equals $1$,

So our final answer is:

$$ \sec\left(-\frac{\pi}{18}\right)\cos\left(\frac{37\pi}{18}\right) = 1 $$

---

$$ \frac{\sin(-20\degree)}{\cos(380\degree)} + \tan(20\degree) = \text{ ?} $$

This seems complicated, but let's break this down one step at a time. Let's
First consider that $\cos(380\degree)$ is over one revolution, specifically by
$20\degree$, so we can rewrite that part as:

$$ \frac{\sin(-20\degree)}{\cos(20\degree)} + \tan(20\degree) = \text{ ?} $$

Next the negative in sine is throwing us, off, Recall that sine is an _Odd_
function. Thusly:

$$ \sin(-\theta) = -\sin(\theta) $$

We can use that to rewrite our expression as:

$$ \frac{-\sin(20\degree)}{\cos(20\degree)} + \tan(20\degree) = \text{ ?} $$

And $\tan(20\degree)$ is just $\dfrac{\sin(20\degree)}{\cos(20\degree)}$.
Therefore:

$$ -\frac{\sin(20\degree)}{\cos(20\degree)} + \frac{\sin(20\degree)}{\cos(20\degree)} = \text{ ?} $$

And this is just $0$:

$$ -\frac{\sin(20\degree)}{\cos(20\degree)} + \frac{\sin(20\degree)}{\cos(20\degree)} = 0 $$

We also could have rewritten it as:

$$ -\tan(20\degree) + \tan(20\degree) = 0 $$
