# How to Solve Trigonometric Equations (Precalculus - Trigonometry 22)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hBk7OnEYPcw)

---

Solving Trigonometric Equations is not all that different from solving standard
Algebraic Equations.

In order to solve Trigonometric Equations, we'll need to follow three steps:

1. We'll need to utilize methods to isolate our Trigonometric Functions.

2. Once done, attempt to use the Unit Circle to solve the Equation.

3. Because we are not using Inverse Trigonometric Functions, do _not_ restrict
   the Domain of your answer along the Unit Circle

There is a bit more to it than this. One additional note is that we usually
limit our answer within a certain Period. Because all Trigonometric Functions
repeat from $-\infty$ to $\infty$, we have to restrict the Period of our answer
in order to derive any meaningful answer.

Another thing to note is that if the argument to our Trigonometric Function is
ever more in depth than simply an angle (_i.e._ $\theta$), then we will need to
manipulate our Period to find our answer.

All of these steps and nuances will become clear as we progress throught his
lecture.

---

$$ 2\sin\theta + 3 = 2 $$

This is pretty much akin to a standard Algebraic Function. Let's start by
isolating our Sine function:

$$ 2\sin\theta + 3 = 2 $$

$$ 2\sin\theta = -1 $$

$$ \sin\theta = -\frac{1}{2} $$

This is essentially saying "At what Angle do we have a $y$-coordinate of
$-\dfrac{1}{2}$"

While we are restricted to one Period from $0$ to $2\pi$, we are not restricted
like we are in Inverse Trigonometric Functions. Thusly we will indeed have _two_
solutions.

If we consult the Unit Circle we will find that we have two answers, one in
Quadrant III and one in Quadrant IV:

$$ \theta = \frac{7\pi}{6} \text{, } \theta = \frac{11\pi}{6} $$

$$ \text{All Solutions On: } 0 \leq \theta < 2\pi $$

Notice we are not delving into negative angles, as that would break out of the
Period we have established we are working in.

We can also present a _General Solution_, where we express that our solution
exists at these two angles every $2k\pi$ where $k$ represents one full
revolution along the Unit Circle:

$$ \theta = \frac{7\pi}{6}  + 2k\pi \text{, } \theta = \frac{11\pi}{6} + 2k\pi $$

---

$$ 4\cos^2\theta - 3 = 0 $$

$$ 4\cos^2\theta = 3 $$

$$ \cos^2\theta = \frac{3}{4} $$

$$ \sqrt{\cos^2\theta} = \pm \sqrt{\frac{3}{4}} $$

$$ \cos\theta = \pm \sqrt{\frac{3}{4}} $$

$$ \cos\theta = \pm \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} $$

We're actually going to get four solutions here, as we'll get two angles for
positive, and two angles for negative.

$$ \cos\theta = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \text{, } \cos\theta = -\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{\pi}{6} \text{, } \theta = \frac{11\pi}{6} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{6}\text{, } \theta = \frac{7\pi}{6} $$

$$ \text{All Solutions On: } 0 \leq \theta < 2\pi $$

---

$$ 3\tan^2\theta = 1 $$

$$ \tan^2\theta = \frac{1}{3} $$

$$ \sqrt{\tan^2\theta} = \pm \sqrt{\frac{1}{3}} $$

$$ \tan\theta = \pm \sqrt{\frac{1}{3}} $$

$$ \tan\theta = \pm \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}} $$

$$ \tan\theta = \pm \frac{\sqrt{3}}{3} $$

$$ \tan\theta = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{3} \text{, } \tan\theta = -\frac{\sqrt{3}}{3} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{\pi}{6} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{6} \text{, } \theta = \frac{7\pi}{6} \text{, } \theta = \frac{11\pi}{6} $$

$$ \text{All Solutions On: } 0 \leq \theta < 2\pi $$

---

So what happens when we don't have a simple angle as an argument to our
Trigonometric Function? Consider the following Problem Statement:

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \sin(3\theta) = -1 $$

In this case, we are going to use some substitution, and once we solve for that
substitution, we're going to then restrict the Period of our answer to get at
our actual solution.

$$ \alpha = 3\theta $$

$$ \sin\alpha = -1 $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{3\pi}{2} $$

Now, what do we do from here? Well this is where we learn something new. Recall
from our lectures on Graphing Trigonometric Functions that multiplying an Angle
causes the Frequency of our Graph to occur more rapidly (the graph's periods
cycle at shorter intervals). This means that our Trigonometric Function is
cycling up to $2\pi$ more frequently.

In regards to evaluating this equation, this means that we will now need to add
intervals of $2\pi$ until we have "cycled" through the Unit Circle $3$ times.

$$ \alpha = \frac{3\pi}{2} \text{, } 2\pi \text{, } 4\pi $$

The first term $\dfrac{3\pi}{2}$ is our first cycle through the Unit Circle,
$2\pi$ is our second, and $4\pi$ is our third.

$$ \alpha = \frac{3\pi}{2} \text{, } \frac{7\pi}{2} \text{, } \frac{11\pi}{2} $$

But recall in our original problem statement this restriction:

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

Within $\alpha$'s three solutions, two of them lie well outside of this
restriction, so for $\theta$. But don't let this confuse you. These angles may
be outside of our restricted Range, but that is for $\alpha$, not $\theta$, the
angle we actually want ot solve for.

Let's now resubstitute back in $3\theta$ for $\alpha$:

$$ 3\theta = \frac{3\pi}{2} \text{, } \frac{7\pi}{2} \text{, } \frac{11\pi}{2} $$

If we now divide each of our three potential solutions by $3$, we'll get the
angles for $\theta$:

$$ \theta = \frac{3\pi}{6} \text{, } \frac{7\pi}{6} \text{, } \frac{11\pi}{6} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{\pi}{2} \text{, } \frac{7\pi}{6} \text{, } \frac{11\pi}{6} $$

---

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \tan(2\theta) = -1 $$

$$ \alpha = 2\theta $$

$$ \tan\alpha = -1 $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{3\pi}{4} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{7\pi}{4} $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{3\pi}{4} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{7\pi}{4} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{11\pi}{4} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{15\pi}{4} $$

$$ 2\theta = \frac{3\pi}{4} \text{, } 2\theta= \frac{7\pi}{4} \text{, } 2\theta = \frac{11\pi}{4} \text{, } 2\theta = \frac{15\pi}{4} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{3\pi}{8} \text{, } \theta = \frac{7\pi}{8} \text{, } \theta = \frac{11\pi}{8} \text{, } \theta = \frac{15\pi}{8} $$

All of our answers fall within the range established by the Problem statement, o
all of these are valid solutions.

$$ \boxed{\theta = \frac{3\pi}{8} \text{, } \theta = \frac{7\pi}{8} \text{, } \theta = \frac{11\pi}{8} \text{, } \theta = \frac{15\pi}{8}} $$

---

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \cos(2\theta) = -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \alpha = 2\theta $$

$$ \cos\alpha = -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{4\pi}{3} $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{2\pi}{3} + 2\pi \text{, }\alpha = \frac{4\pi}{3} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{4\pi}{3} + 2\pi $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{8\pi}{3} \text{, }\alpha = \frac{4\pi}{3} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{10\pi}{3} $$

$$ 2\theta = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } 2\theta = \frac{8\pi}{3} \text{, } 2\theta = \frac{4\pi}{3} \text{, } 2\theta = \frac{10\pi}{3} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{2\pi}{6} \text{, } \theta = \frac{8\pi}{6} \text{, } \theta = \frac{4\pi}{6} \text{, } \theta = \frac{10\pi}{6} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{4\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{3} $$

None of these solutions violate the Range restrictions established in the
Problem Statement and therefore they are all valid. Let's just reorder our
answers so that they lie in numerical order.

$$ \boxed{\theta = \frac{\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{4\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{3}} $$

---

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \tan\left(\frac{\theta}{2}\right) = \sqrt{3} $$

Because our $\theta$ is actually divided by $2$ here, on our Graph, our
Trigonometric Function would actually occur _less_ often. Meaning that the
cycles under which the Trigonometric Function recurs are longer, and don't recur
as often. The technique works, but understanding this will make the process that
follows make a bit mores sense.

$$ \tan\left(\frac{\theta}{2}\right) = \sqrt{3} $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{\theta}{2} $$

$$ \tan\alpha = \sqrt{3} $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{\pi}{3} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{4\pi}{3} $$

Now, we have less than $1$ cycles as indicated by the coefficient of
$\dfrac{1}{2}$ on our argument to Tangent, this means that we simply skip the
step of adding cycles.

$$ \frac{\theta}{2} = \frac{\pi}{3} \text{, } \frac{\theta}{2} = \frac{4\pi}{3} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{8\pi}{3} $$

Now, $\dfrac{8\pi}{3}$ is definitely over the Range limit of $2\pi$, so it is
not included in our final answer:

$$ \boxed{\theta = \frac{2\pi}{3}} $$

---

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \sec\left(\frac{3\theta}{2}\right) = -2 $$

Whenever you see a Reciprocal Trigonometric Function, just use it's
corresponding Trigonometric Function, and take the Reciprocal:

$$ \cos\left(\frac{3\theta}{2}\right) = -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{3\theta}{2} $$

$$ \cos\alpha = -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{4\pi}{3} $$

Now, how do we evaluate how many cycles of $\dfrac{3\theta}{2}$ ?

Well, interestingly, we add a cycle to our first iteration of $\alpha$, but not
the second, why? Well because that is exactly $1$ cycle, but adding another
cycle to our other would be outside of the Range established in the problem
statement.

We could add this additional cycle anyways, and when in doubt, just add it. We
won't in this case because we know it will fall outside of our range.

$$ \alpha = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{2\pi}{3} + 2\pi \text{, } \alpha = \frac{4\pi}{3} $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{8\pi}{3} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{4\pi}{3} $$

$$ \frac{3\theta}{2} = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \frac{3\theta}{2} = \frac{8\pi}{3} \text{, } \frac{3\theta}{2} = \frac{4\pi}{3} $$

$$ 3\theta = \frac{4\pi}{3} \text{, } 3\theta = \frac{16\pi}{3} \text{, } 3\theta = \frac{8\pi}{3} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{4\pi}{9} \text{, } \theta = \frac{16\pi}{9} \text{, } \theta = \frac{8\pi}{9} $$

All of these fall within our Range. Let's reorder it and present our final
answer:

$$ \boxed{\theta = \frac{4\pi}{9} \text{, }  \theta = \frac{8\pi}{9} \text{, } \theta = \frac{16\pi}{9}} $$

---

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \sqrt{3}\cot\theta + 1 = 0 $$

$$ \cot\theta = -\frac{1}{\sqrt{3}} $$

$$ \tan\theta = -\sqrt{3} $$

$$ \boxed{\theta = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{3}} $$

---

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ 4\sin\theta + 3\sqrt{3} = \sqrt{3} $$

$$ 4\sin\theta = -2\sqrt{3} $$

$$ \sin\theta = -\frac{1}{2}\sqrt{3} $$

$$ \sin\theta = -\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{4\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{3} $$

---

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \sin(3\theta + \frac{\pi}{18}) = 1 $$

$$ \alpha = 3\theta + \frac{\pi}{18} $$

$$ \sin\alpha = -1 $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{\pi}{2} $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{\pi}{2} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{\pi}{2} + 2\pi \text{, } \alpha = \frac{\pi}{2} + 4\pi $$

$$ \alpha = \frac{\pi}{2} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{5\pi}{2} \text{, } \alpha = \frac{9\pi}{2} $$

$$ 3\theta + \frac{\pi}{18} = \frac{\pi}{2} \text{, } 3\theta + \frac{\pi}{18} = \frac{5\pi}{2} \text{, } 3\theta + \frac{\pi}{18} = \frac{9\pi}{2} $$

$$ 3\theta = \frac{8\pi}{18} \text{, } 3\theta = \frac{44\pi}{18} \text{, } 3\theta = \frac{80\pi}{18} $$

$$ 3\theta = \frac{4\pi}{9} \text{, } 3\theta = \frac{22\pi}{9} \text{, } 3\theta = \frac{40\pi}{9} $$

$$ \boxed{\theta = \frac{4\pi}{27} \text{, } \theta = \frac{22\pi}{27} \text{, } \theta = \frac{40\pi}{27}} $$

---

Let's throw in some difficult ones.

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \cos\theta = 0.6 $$

Now, this doesn't lie on the Unit Circle. For this, we can solve it using Cosine
Inverse (ArcCos), but we have to keep in mind that due to the Domain Restriction
of Cosine Inverse, we will _not_ get the entirety of the answer here. We'll
solve this using Cosine Inverse, and then show how we can get the other answers:

$$ \cos^{-1}(0.6) = \theta $$

$$ \theta \approx 0.927 $$

But this will only give us one solution. Recall that a positive result for
Cosine, as we have here, means that we have two angles. One in Quadrant I, and
one in Quadrant IV (where $x$-coordinates, and therefore Cosine results, are
positive).

Now, because our range cannot include $-\pi$ answers, we can find this other
angle by subtracting $\theta$ from $2\pi$.

$$ 2\pi - \theta \rightarrow 2\pi - 0.927 \approx 5.36 \text{ radians} $$

$$ \theta \approx 0.927 \text{, } \theta \approx 5.36 $$

---

We can utilize a similar technique here.

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \sin\theta = 0.4 $$

$$ \sin^{-1}(0.4) = \theta $$

$$ \theta \approx 0.412 \text{ radians} $$

Now, any Sine function that yields a positive result means that the
$y$-coordinate is positive. This means our angle must lie within either Quadrant
I or Quadrant II. And again, our above answer is only _one_ of _two_ solutions.

Well if we imagine this angl on the Unit Circle, this other angle is reflected
along the $y$-axis and goes almost up to $\pi$. Thusly we can just subtract our
first answer by $\pi$ and find our second angle:

$$ \pi - \theta \rightarrow \pi - 0.412 \approx 2.73 \text{ radians} $$

$$ \theta \approx 0.412 \text{ radians, } \theta \approx 2.73 \text{ radians} $$

---

Let's up the difficulty here and move into multiple Trigonometric Functions and
how to solve some of these using Identities.

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ 2\cos^2\theta + \cos\theta = 1 $$

Can we combine these? No, because one Cosine is squared and the other isn't. But
we can Factor. Let's also substitute to make it easier to understand:

$$ u = \cos\theta $$

$$ 2u^2 + u = 1 $$

$$ 2u^2 + u - 1 = 0 $$

$$ (2u - 1)(u + 1) = 0 $$

$$ u + 1 = 0 $$

$$ u = -1 $$

$$ 2u - 1 = 0 $$

$$ 2u = 1 $$

$$ u = \frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \cos\theta = -1 $$

$$ \theta = \pi $$

$$ \cos\theta = \frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{3} $$

$$ \boxed{\theta = \pi \text{, } \theta = \frac{\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{3}} $$

---

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ (\tan\theta - 1)(\sec\theta - 1) = 0 $$

Don't distribute this...

You can just use the Zero Product Property to find the value of each Function:

$$ \tan\theta - 1 = 0 $$

$$ \sec\theta - 1 = 0 $$

$$ \tan\theta - 1 = 0 $$

$$ \tan\theta = 1 $$

$$ \theta = \frac{\pi}{4} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{4} $$

$$ \sec\theta - 1 = 0 $$

$$ \sec\theta = 1 $$

$$ \cos\theta = \frac{1}{1} $$

$$ \cos\theta = 1 $$

$$ \theta = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{\theta = 0 \text{, } \theta = \frac{\pi}{4} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{4}} $$

---

Let's now move onto some examples that illustrate the important use of
Identities.

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \sin^2\theta - \cos^2\theta = 1 + \cos\theta $$

Now, we're only going to give a brief introduction here to Identities, as they
will be covered much more extensively in another upcoming lecture. That said,
Identities are very important in Calculus II, and they are quite useful for
solving what are known in Calculus as Integrals.

Now, we can probably factor out the Cosine terms in our problem above, but
$\sin^2\theta$ is a bit of a problem child here. What Identities do we know in
regards to $\sin^2\theta$ ?

We know that:

$$ \sin^2\theta + \cos^2\theta = 1 $$

This, as we covered in a past lecture, we know as the _Pythagorean Identity_. We
know that:

$$ a^2 + b^2 = c^2 $$

And on a Circle, this would be:

$$ y^2 + x^2 = r^2 $$

And finally, on the Unit Circle:

$$ y^2 + x^2 = 1 $$

Thusly we can say that:

$$ \sin^2\theta + \cos^2\theta = 1 $$

But notice that because we know this above Identity to be true, we can express
$\sin^2\theta$ as:

$$ \sin^2\theta = 1 - \cos^2\theta $$

And then substitute that into our original problem:

$$ (1 - \cos^2\theta) - \cos^2\theta = 1 + \cos\theta $$

We can now treat this like a standard Algebra problem:

$$ u = \cos\theta $$

$$ 1 - u^2 - u^2 = 1 + u$$

$$ 1 - 2u^2  = 1 + u $$

$$ -2u^2 - u = 0 $$

$$ 2u^2 + u = 0 $$

$$ u(2u + 1) = 0 $$

$$ u = 0 $$

$$ 2u + 1 = 0 $$

$$ 2u = -1 $$

$$ u = -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \cos\theta = 0 $$

$$ \theta = \frac{\pi}{2} \text{, } \theta = \frac{3\pi}{2} $$

$$ \cos\theta = -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{4\pi}{3} $$

$$ \boxed{\theta = \frac{\pi}{2} \text{, } \theta = \frac{3\pi}{2} \text{, } \theta = \frac{2\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{4\pi}{3}} $$

---

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \cos\theta = -\sin(-\theta) $$

Let's start on the more difficult side:

$$ -\sin(-\theta) $$

Recall that Sine is an Odd Function, so therefore:

$$ \sin(-\theta) = -\sin\theta  $$

This means we can rewrite our original problem statement as:

$$ \cos\theta = -(-\sin\theta) $$

And a double negative is positive, so:

$$ \cos\theta = \sin\theta $$

Now, we could look at the Unit Circle here and simply determine that our angles
for $\theta$ are $\dfrac{\pi}{4}$ and $\dfrac{5\pi}{4}$, but another way of
getting to our solution is by "Moving Towards Tangent."

Note that in some mathematical problems, we will want to "Move Away From
Tangent", and other times we will want to "Move Towards Tangent." This simply
means deciding between using Tangent somehow in our problems to solve the
equation.

In this case, consider what would happen if we divided both sides by
$\cos\theta$:

$$ \frac{\cos\theta}{\cos\theta} = \frac{\sin\theta}{\cos\theta} $$

Well this would be:

$$ 1 = \frac{\sin\theta}{\cos\theta} $$

But the fraction is indeed $\tan\theta$, so this actually evaluates to:

$$ \tan\theta = 1 $$

And this yields the same answers:

$$ \boxed{\theta = \frac{\pi}{4} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{4}} $$

---

Find All Solutions on $0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$.

$$ \tan\theta = 2\sin\theta $$

An Identity of Tangent, and one of the most simple Identities to remember is:

$$ \tan\theta = \frac{\sin\theta}{\cos\theta} $$

This is an example of "Moving Away From Tangent". We can rewrite this as:

$$ \frac{\sin\theta}{\cos\theta} = 2\sin\theta $$

If we can factor, this would be easier. Let's get all terms on one side:

$$ \frac{\sin\theta}{\cos\theta} - 2\sin\theta = 0 $$

Now we can factor out $\sin\theta$:

$$ \sin\theta\left(\frac{1}{\cos\theta} - 2\right) = 0 $$

And thanks to the Zero Product Property we can solve for all values of $\theta$:

$$ \sin\theta = 0 $$

$$ \frac{1}{\cos\theta} - 2 = 0 $$

$$ \frac{1}{\cos\theta} = 2 $$

$$ 1 = 2\cos\theta $$

$$ \cos\theta = \frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \sin\theta = 0 $$

$$ \theta = 0 \text{, } \theta = \pi $$

$$ \cos\theta = \frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{3} $$

$$ \boxed{\theta = 0 \text{, } \theta = \pi \text{, } \theta = \frac{\pi}{3} \text{, } \theta = \frac{5\pi}{3}} $$
