# Proving the Double and Half Angle Formulas for Trigonometry (Precalculus - Trigonometry 27)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Epa2mi8hzBA)

---

Double and Half Angle Formulas are useful in Calculus II, and are useful in
deriving some Identities that will also be relevant in the context of that
course.

One of the first things to recognize about the Sum/Difference Formulas of the
previous lectures is that they can be utilized to derive other formulas.

Take the two Sum Formulas from the previous lectures:

$$ \sin(\alpha + \beta) = \sin\alpha\cos\beta + \cos\alpha\sin\beta $$

$$ \cos(\alpha + \beta) = \cos\alpha\cos\beta - \sin\alpha\sin\beta $$

We can actually utilize these formulas to derive the Double and Half Angle
Formulas.

---

## Double Angle Formulas Using Sine and Cosine

Consider that both $alpha$ and $beta$ were the same Angle?

$$ \alpha = \beta $$

For simplicity's sake, we could refer to this angle as $\theta$. What then? If
we were to take, say, the Sine Sum Formula and condense it, it would be:

$$ \sin(\alpha + \beta) = \sin(\theta + \theta) = \sin(2\theta) $$

This would change our Sine Sum Formula to:

$$ \sin(2\theta) = \sin\theta\cos\theta + \cos\theta\sin\theta $$

But due to the Product Property, this would just be:

$$ \boxed{\sin(2\theta) = 2\sin\theta\cos\theta} $$

This is our first _Double-Angle Formula_. For Sine, this will be the only one we
will find. For Cosine, we will find three of them.

Consider we do the same for the Sum Cosine Formula:

$$ \cos(2\theta) = \cos\theta\cos\theta - \sin\theta\sin\theta $$

And this leads us to:

$$ \boxed{\cos(2\theta) = \cos^2\theta - \sin^2\theta} $$

This is the first of three Cosine Double-Angle Formulas. Let's manipulate this a
bit to find the others.

Let's first investigate as to what $\sin^2\theta$ is. According to the
Pythagorean Identity:

$$ \sin^2\theta + \cos^2\theta = 1 $$

But this also means that:

$$ \sin^2\theta = 1 - \cos^2\theta $$

And if we then plug that into our Cosine Double-Angle Formula from above:

$$ \cos(2\theta) = \cos^2\theta - (1 - \cos^2\theta) $$

$$ \cos(2\theta) = \cos^2\theta - 1 + \cos^2\theta $$

$$ \boxed{\cos(2\theta) = 2\cos^2\theta - 1} $$

Similarly, we can solve the Pythagorean Identity for $\cos^2\theta$:

$$ \sin^2\theta + \cos^2\theta = 1 $$

$$ \cos^2\theta =  1 - \sin^2\theta $$

And plugging this into our Cosine Double-Angle Formula from above yields us:

$$ \cos(2\theta) = (1 - \sin^2\theta) - \sin^2\theta $$

$$ \boxed{\cos(2\theta) = 1 - 2\sin^2\theta} $$

The boxed equations above are the Three Cosine Double-Angle Formulas.

---

We can utilize these above to show some interesting Identities. Consider if we
wanted to use the following Double Angle Formula and solve for $\cos^2\theta$:

$$ \cos(2\theta) = 2\cos^2\theta - 1 $$

We could solve this using standard algebra:

$$ \cos(2\theta) + 1 = 2\cos^2\theta $$

$$ \frac{\cos(2\theta) + 1}{2} = \cos^2\theta $$

The convention is to rewrite this as:

$$ \boxed{\cos^2\theta = \frac{1 + \cos(2\theta)}{2}} $$

For reasons that will become apparent when we investigate the next evaluation.

Similarly, we can solve for $\sin^2\theta$ using the following Double Angle
Formula:

$$ \cos(2\theta) = 1 - 2\sin^2\theta $$

$$ \cos(2\theta) - 1 = -2\sin^2\theta $$

$$ \frac{\cos(2\theta) - 1}{-2} = \sin^2\theta $$

$$ \boxed{\sin^2\theta = \frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{2}} $$

---

## Double Angle Formulas Using Tangent

Recall the Tangent Sum Formula from the previous lectures:

$$ \tan(\alpha + \beta) = \frac{\tan\alpha + \tan\beta}{1 - \tan\alpha\tan\beta} $$

Again, we'll ask the question, what if $\alpha = \beta$ ?

We'll refer to both angles as $\theta$

$$ \tan(2\theta) =  \frac{\tan\theta + \tan\theta}{1 - \tan\theta\tan\theta} $$

$$ \boxed{\tan(2\theta) =  \frac{2\tan\theta}{1 - \tan^2\theta}} $$

This is the Double Angle Formula for Tangent, there is only one of them.

We can, however, take this and prove some other interesting Identities.

Recall that:

$$ \tan^2\theta = \frac{\sin^2\theta}{\cos^2\theta} $$

By using the previous two Cosine Identities we explored previously, we can
substitute in for $\tan^2\theta$ like so:

$$ \tan^2\theta = \frac{\dfrac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{2}}{\dfrac{1 + \cos(2\theta)}{2}} $$

$$ \boxed{\tan^2\theta = \frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{1 + \cos(2\theta)}} $$

---

## Half-Angle Formulas

Now that we have covered Double Angle Formulas, we actually can use these to
derive Half-Angle Formulas.

Let's take this Double Angle Formula for $\sin^2\theta$:

$$ \sin^2\theta = \frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{2} $$

And let's say that $\theta$ were equal exactly to another angle, $\alpha$, over
$2$ (halved):

$$ \theta = \frac{\alpha}{2} $$

If we then substitute in $\dfrac{\alpha}{2}$ for $\theta$ in our $\sin^2\theta$
function:

$$ \sin^2\left(\frac{\alpha}{2}\right) = \frac{1 - \cos\left(2\left(\dfrac{\alpha}{2}\right)\right)}{2} $$

This would further evaluate to:

$$ \sin^2\left(\frac{\alpha}{2}\right) = \frac{1 - \cos\alpha}{2} $$

If we now want to solve for $\sin\left(\dfrac{\alpha}{2}\right)$, we'll have to
take the Square Root:

$$ \boxed{\sin\left(\frac{\alpha}{2}\right) = \pm \sqrt{\frac{1 - \cos\alpha}{2}}} $$

Note here that the return values for any Sine Function will have a sign that
reflects which Quadrants they are in. Recall that any Sine function returns the
$y$-coordinate. If the $y$-coordinate is positive, then it is in Quadrants I or
II, if it is negative, then it is in Quadrants III and IV. It is important to
consider this when evaluating and thinking about the above formula.

---

Let's now consider a similar Half Angle Formula for $\cos^2\theta$:

$$ \cos^2\theta = \frac{1 + \cos(2\theta)}{2} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{\alpha}{2} $$

$$ \cos^2\left(\frac{\alpha}{2}\right) = \frac{1 + \cos\left(2\left(\dfrac{\alpha}{2}\right)\right)}{2} $$

$$ \cos^2\left(\frac{\alpha}{2}\right) = \frac{1 + \cos\alpha}{2} $$

$$ \boxed{\cos\left(\frac{\alpha}{2}\right) = \pm \sqrt{\frac{1 + \cos\alpha}{2}}} $$

If we consider which Quadrants this will lie in, consider that the
$x$-coordinate is positive within Quadrants I and IV, and negative within
Quadrants II and III.

---

Let's now consider the Half Angle Formula for $\tan^2\theta$:

$$ \tan^2\theta = \frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{1 + \cos(2\theta)} $$

$$ \theta = \frac{\alpha}{2} $$

$$ \tan^2\left(\frac{\alpha}{2}\right)= \frac{1 - \cos\left(2\left(\dfrac{\alpha}{2}\right)\right)}{1 + \cos\left(2\left(\dfrac{\alpha}{2}\right)\right)} $$

$$ \tan^2\left(\frac{\alpha}{2}\right)= \frac{1 - \cos\alpha}{1 + \cos\alpha} $$

$$ \tan\left(\frac{\alpha}{2}\right)= \pm \sqrt{\frac{1 - \cos\alpha}{1 + \cos\alpha}} $$

And here, for Tangent, Tangent is positive in Quadrants I and III, and is
negative in Quadrants II and IV.

---

In the next lecture, we will go over the uses of these. For now, let's simply
combine these into some nice tables for your future reference:

| Double Angle                                            |
| ------------------------------------------------------- |
| $\sin(2\theta) = 2\sin\theta\cos\theta$                 |
| $\cos(2\theta) = \cos^2\theta - \sin^2\theta$           |
| $\cos(2\theta) = 2\cos^2\theta - 1$                     |
| $\cos(2\theta) = 1 - 2\sin^2\theta$                     |
| $\tan(2\theta) = \dfrac{2\tan\theta}{1 - \tan^2\theta}$ |

| Identities                                                    |
| ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| $\sin^2\theta = \dfrac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{2}$                 |
| $\cos^2\theta = \dfrac{1 + \cos(2\theta)}{2}$                 |
| $\tan^2\theta = \dfrac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{1 + \cos(2\theta)}$ |

| Half-Angle                                                                               |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| $\sin\left(\dfrac{\alpha}{2}\right) = \pm \sqrt{\dfrac{1 - \cos\alpha}{2}}$              |
| $\cos\left(\dfrac{\alpha}{2}\right) = \pm \sqrt{\dfrac{1 + \cos\alpha}{2}}$              |
| $\tan\left(\dfrac{\alpha}{2}\right) = \pm \sqrt{\dfrac{1 - \cos\alpha}{1 + \cos\alpha}}$ |

**Note on Half-Angles**

The Quadrant of the Angle is determined by the $\pm$ of $\dfrac{\alpha}{2}$.
