# How to Convert From Rectangular Equations to Polar Equations (Precalculus - Trigonometry 39)

[Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=blUobGPSMCk)

---

We have seen that, in essence, Rectangular Equations are any equation that can
be graphed on an $x$/$y$ coordinate system. It almost always takes the form of
two variables, $x$, and $y$, that represent points along their respective axes.

A Polar Equation is an equation that includes a distance, $r$, and an angle,
$\theta$.

Now, some functions, like lines, planes, etc. are very much easier to graph on a
Rectangular Coordinate System. Other shapes, however, like ellipses, circles, or
[cardioids](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardioid) are easier to graph on the
Polar Coordinate System.

This creates a need to be able to convert between the two Coordinate Systems
when we move forward into more advanced Mathematics.

---

## The Basics

First and foremost, convert your standard Pythagorean Theorem into a form that
has variaables recognizable in both coordinate systems:

$$ x^2 + y^2 = r^2 $$

If you are starting from the Polar Coordinate System, you can determine the
Rectangular points, $x$, and $y$, by using the available data points, $r$, and
$\theta$, as well as one of the Trigonometric Functions, either Sine or Cosine:

$$ x = r\cos\theta $$

$$ y = r\sin\theta $$

We have covered this in the previous lectures. All we will be doing throughout
the majority of this lecture is converting multiple variables at once.

---

Consider the following Rectangular Coordinate Equation:

$$ 2x^2 + 2y^2 = 3 $$

If we can use our first Pythagorean Theorem equation, and isolate it from our
Problem Statement Equation, we should try that first:

$$ x^2 + y^2 = r^2 $$

$$ 2(x^2 + y^2) = 3 $$

$$ 2r^2 = 3 $$

$$ r^2 = \frac{3}{2} $$

$$ r = \sqrt{\frac{3}{2}} $$

Note that we keep the $r$ positive. It simply makes things easier, and it
doesn't have an effect on the actual answer. Let's now just rationalize it:

$$ r = \sqrt{\frac{3}{2}} \cdot \frac{\sqrt{2}}{\sqrt{2}} $$

$$ r = \frac{\sqrt{6}}{2} $$

Now, to be clear, this is telling is a _fixed distance_ from the Pole (the
center/origin) of our Polar Graph. Because this is a constant, and it has no
variable adjusting it, we can easily ascertain that this is a Circle being
graphed on the Polar Coordinate System. It is also a Circle on the Rectangular
Coordinate System, but due to the Pythagorean Theorem proving that the equation
represents a Conic Section of the Rectangular Coordinate Graph.

---

Consider the following Rectangular Coordinate Equation:

$$ x^2 + y^2 = x $$

If you ever see $x^2 + y^2$, just immediately replace it with $r^2$:

$$ r^2 = x $$

The issue is we can proceed no further, unless we know more. Recall that:

$$ x = r\cos\theta $$

$$ r^2 = r\cos\theta $$

One might be tempted to simply divide both sides by $r$, but we have to take
into account that $r$ might be $0$ and give us an undefined answer. Instead,
let's get everything to one side:

$$ r^2 - r\cos\theta = 0 $$

Here we can factor out the $r$:

$$ r(r - \cos\theta) = 0 $$

And now we can use the zero product property to solve for $r$:

$$ r = 0 $$

$$ r - \cos\theta = 0 $$

$$ r = \cos\theta $$

And these are our two answers for the distance, $r$. Briefly, the $r = 0$, is
saying if there is a Radius of $0$, meaning we have a Ray that just has a single
point at the Pole of the Graph.

---

Consider the following Rectangular Coordinate Equation:

$$ x^2 = 4y $$

Because we don't have a $y^2$, we cannot make one, thusly our first option to
somehow plug in $x^2 + y^2$ cannot be done easily here.

Instead, let's use our other two equations for $x$ and $y$ and substitute them
in:

$$ (r\cos\theta)^2 = 4(r\sin\theta) $$

$$ r^2\cos^2\theta = 4r\sin\theta $$

Again, the temptation to divide by $r$ is real, but it doesn't account for the
case where $r = 0$. Instead let's move everything to one side:

$$ r^2cos^2\theta - 4r\sin\theta = 0 $$

And factor out the $r$:

$$ r(r\cos^2\theta - 4\sin\theta) = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{r = 0} $$

$$ r\cos^2\theta - 4\sin\theta = 0 $$

$$ r\cos^2\theta = 4\sin\theta $$

$$ r = \frac{4\sin\theta}{\cos^2\theta} $$

$$ r = \frac{4\sin\theta}{\cos\theta} \cdot \frac{1}{\cos\theta} $$

$$ \boxed{r = 4\tan\theta\sec\theta} $$

---

Consider the following Rectangular Coordinate Equation:

$$ 2xy = 1 $$

$$ 2(r\cos\theta)(r\sin\theta) = 1 $$

$$ 2r^2\cos\theta\sin\theta = 1 $$

$$ r^2 \cdot 2\sin\theta\cos\theta = 1 $$

Recall that this second term is an identity:

$$ 2\sin\theta\cos\theta = \sin(2\theta) $$

$$ \boxed{r^2 \cdot \sin(2\theta) = 1} $$

And Professor Leonard says this is actually fine leaving this as is.

---

$$ (x - 3)^2 + y^2 = 9 $$

$$ (x - 3)(x - 3) + y^2 = 9 $$

$$ x^2 - 6x + 9 + y^2 = 9 $$

$$ (x^2 + y^2) - 6x = 0 $$

$$ r^2 - 6(r\cos\theta) = 0 $$

$$ r(r - 6\cos\theta) = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{r = 0} $$

$$ r - 6\cos\theta = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{r = 6\cos\theta} $$

---

$$ x = 3 $$

$$ r\cos\theta = 3 $$

$$ r = \frac{3}{\cos\theta} $$

$$ r = 3\sec\theta $$

This is just demonstrating that sometimes the Rectangular Coordinate System is
much easier to reason about than Polar.

---

$$ y = 7 $$

$$ r\sin\theta = 7 $$

$$ r = \frac{7}{\sin\theta} $$

$$ r = 7\csc\theta $$

The same applies here.
